Bag-Mask Ventilation during Tracheal Intubation of Critically Ill Adults
Authors: Jonathan D. Casey, M.D. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7188-4200, David R. Janz, M.D., Derek W. Russell, M.D. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2716-1344, Derek J. Vonderhaar, M.D., Aaron M. Joffe, D.O., Kevin M. Dischert, M.D., Ryan M. Brown, M.D., Aline N. Zouk, M.D., Swati Gulati, M.B., B.S., Brent E. Heideman, M.D., Michael G. Lester, M.D., Alexandra H. Toporek, M.D., Itay Bentov, M.D., Ph.D., Wesley H. Self, M.D., Todd W. Rice, M.D., and Matthew W. Semler, M.D., for the PreVent Investigators and the Pragmatic Critical Care Research Group

Published February 18, 2019


Abstract
Background
Hypoxemia is the most common complication during tracheal intubation of critically ill adults and may increase the risk of cardiac arrest and death. Whether positive-pressure ventilation with a bag-mask device (bag-mask ventilation) during tracheal intubation of critically ill adults prevents hypoxemia without increasing the risk of aspiration remains controversial.
Methods
In a multicenter, randomized trial conducted in seven intensive care units in the United States, we randomly assigned adults undergoing tracheal intubation to receive either ventilation with a bag-mask device or no ventilation between induction and laryngoscopy. The primary outcome was the lowest oxygen saturation observed during the interval between induction and 2 minutes after tracheal intubation. The secondary outcome was the incidence of severe hypoxemia, defined as an oxygen saturation of less than 80%.
Results
Among the 401 patients enrolled, the median lowest oxygen saturation was 96% (interquartile range, 87 to 99) in the bag-mask ventilation group and 93% (interquartile range, 81 to 99) in the no-ventilation group (P=0.01). A total of 21 patients (10.9%) in the bag-mask ventilation group had severe hypoxemia, as compared with 45 patients (22.8%) in the no-ventilation group (relative risk, 0.48; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.30 to 0.77). Operator-reported aspiration occurred during 2.5% of intubations in the bag-mask ventilation group and during 4.0% in the no-ventilation group (P=0.41). The incidence of new opacity on chest radiography in the 48 hours after tracheal intubation was 16.4% and 14.8%, respectively (P=0.73).
Conclusions
Among critically ill adults undergoing tracheal intubation, patients receiving bag-mask ventilation had higher oxygen saturations and a lower incidence of severe hypoxemia than those receiving no ventilation. (Funded by Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research and others; PreVent ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03026322.)
More than 1.5 million patients undergo tracheal intubation each year in the United States.1 Up to 40% of tracheal intubations in the intensive care unit (ICU) are complicated by hypoxemia, which may lead to cardiac arrest and death.2-7
For critically ill adults undergoing tracheal intubation, the nearly simultaneous administration of a sedative and a neuromuscular blocking agent (rapid-sequence induction) facilitates intubation on the first laryngoscopy attempt.8-10 However, rapid-sequence induction involves an inherent delay of 45 to 90 seconds between medication administration and initiation of laryngoscopy.11 Whether providing positive-pressure ventilation with a bag-mask device (bag-mask ventilation) during this interval prevents hypoxemia without increasing the risk of gastric or oropharyngeal aspiration has been debated for nearly 50 years.12-14 Some guidelines recommend providing bag-mask ventilation between induction and laryngoscopy to all patients, including those who are not initially hypoxemic.12,15–17 Other guidelines recommend avoiding bag-mask ventilation between induction and laryngoscopy except to treat hypoxemia, a recommendation that prioritizes the perceived risk of aspiration over the potential benefits of preventing hypoxemia.11,13,18,19
To determine the effect of bag-mask ventilation on hypoxemia during tracheal intubation of critically ill adults, we conducted the Preventing Hypoxemia with Manual Ventilation during Endotracheal Intubation (PreVent) trial. We hypothesized that as compared with no ventilation between induction and laryngoscopy, bag-mask ventilation would significantly increase the lowest oxygen saturation during the interval between induction and 2 minutes after tracheal intubation.
