Levosimendan for the Prevention of Acute Organ Dysfunction in Sepsis
Authors: Anthony C. Gordon, M.D., Gavin D. Perkins, M.D., Mervyn Singer, M.D., Daniel F. McAuley, M.D., Robert M.L. Orme, M.B., Ch.B., Shalini Santhakumaran, M.Sc., Alexina J. Mason, Ph.D., Mary Cross, B.A., Farah Al-Beidh, Ph.D., Janis Best-Lane, M.Sc., David Brealey, M.D., Christopher L. Nutt, M.B., B.Ch., James J. McNamee, M.B., Henrik Reschreiter, M.D., Andrew Breen, M.B., Ch.B., Kathleen D. Liu, M.D., Ph.D., and Deborah Ashby, Ph.D. 

Published October 27, 2016

Abstract

Background
Levosimendan is a calcium-sensitizing drug with inotropic and other properties that may improve outcomes in patients with sepsis.

Methods
We conducted a double-blind, randomized clinical trial to investigate whether levosimendan reduces the severity of organ dysfunction in adults with sepsis. Patients were randomly assigned to receive a blinded infusion of levosimendan (at a dose of 0.05 to 0.2 μg per kilogram of body weight per minute) for 24 hours or placebo in addition to standard care. The primary outcome was the mean daily Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score in the intensive care unit up to day 28 (scores for each of five systems range from 0 to 4, with higher scores indicating more severe dysfunction; maximum score, 20). Secondary outcomes included 28-day mortality, time to weaning from mechanical ventilation, and adverse events.

Results
The trial recruited 516 patients; 259 were assigned to receive levosimendan and 257 to receive placebo. There was no significant difference in the mean (±SD) SOFA score between the levosimendan group and the placebo group (6.68±3.96 vs. 6.06±3.89; mean difference, 0.61; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.07 to 1.29; P=0.053). Mortality at 28 days was 34.5% in the levosimendan group and 30.9% in the placebo group (absolute difference, 3.6 percentage points; 95% CI, −4.5 to 11.7; P=0.43). Among patients requiring ventilation at baseline, those in the levosimendan group were less likely than those in the placebo group to be successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation over the period of 28 days (hazard ratio, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.60 to 0.97; P=0.03). More patients in the levosimendan group than in the placebo group had supraventricular tachyarrhythmia (3.1% vs. 0.4%; absolute difference, 2.7 percentage points; 95% CI, 0.1 to 5.3; P=0.04).

Conclusions
The addition of levosimendan to standard treatment in adults with sepsis was not associated with less severe organ dysfunction or lower mortality. Levosimendan was associated with a lower likelihood of successful weaning from mechanical ventilation and a higher risk of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia. (Funded by the NIHR Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation Programme and others; LeoPARDS Current Controlled Trials number, ISRCTN12776039.)
Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection1 and is a leading cause of death worldwide. Septic shock is the most severe form of the condition and results in circulatory and metabolic abnormalities.2 Persisting hypotension despite adequate fluid resuscitation is due to a combination of profound vasodilatation, vascular hyporeactivity to catecholamines, and myocardial depression.3 Although catecholamines are the recommended first-line therapy for septic shock,4 high doses of administered catecholamines and high levels of circulating catecholamines are associated with poor outcomes and severe side effects, including myocardial injury and peripheral ischemia.5–7

Levosimendan is a calcium-sensitizing drug with inotropic and vasodilator properties that is licensed in numerous countries (not including the United States) to treat decompensated heart failure.8 In contrast to catecholamines, levosimendan causes increased myocardial contraction with a minimal increase in oxygen demand,9 and diastolic relaxation is not impaired. Small studies that have investigated the use of levosimendan in patients with septic shock have shown improvements in hemodynamic variables,10 microcirculatory flow,11 and renal10 and hepatic12 function, as compared with dobutamine. Other important noninotropic effects have also been shown, including antiinflammatory,13 antioxidative,14 and antiapoptotic15 effects and possibly protection from ischemia and reperfusion injury.16 A recent meta-analysis supported the use of levosimendan in patients with sepsis, but only 125 patients in total had been treated.17 The Levosimendan for the Prevention of Acute Organ Dysfunction in Sepsis (LeoPARDS) trial was designed to test whether the addition of levosimendan to standard care would reduce the severity of organ dysfunction among patients with septic shock and to assess its safety profile in patients with this condition.
