Assessment of Glenohumeral
Subluxation in Poststroke Hemiplegia:
Comparison Between Ultrasound and
Fingerbreadth Palpation Methods

Praveen Kumar, Marianne Mardon, Michael Bradley, Selena Cray,
Annette Swinkels

Background. Glenohumeral subluxation (GHS) is a common poststroke compli­
cation. Treatment of GHS is hampered by the lack of objective, real-time clinical
measurements.
Objective. The aims of this study were: (1) to compare an ultrasound method of
GHS measurement with the fingerbreadth palpation method using a receiver oper­
ating characteristic curve (ROC) and (2) to report the sensitivity and specificity of this
method.
Design. A prospective study was conducted.
S etting. The study was conducted in local hospitals and day centers in the
southwest of England.
Patients. One hundred five patients who had one-sided weakness following a
first-time stroke (51 men, 54 women; mean age=71 years, SD=11) and who gave
informed consent were enrolled in the study.
Measurements. Ultrasound measurements of acromion-greater tuberosity
(AGT) distance were used for the assessment of GHS. Measurements were under­
taken on both shoulders by a research physical therapist trained in shoulder ultra­
sound with the patient seated in a standardized position. Fingerbreadth palpation
assessment of GHS was undertaken by a clinical physical therapist based at the
hospital, who also visited the day centers.
Results. The area under the ROC curve was 0.73 (95% confidence interval [95%
Cl] =0.63, 0.83), suggesting that the ultrasound method has good agreement com­
pared with the fingerbreadth palpation method. A cutoff point of £0.2 cm AGT
measurement difference between affected and unaffected shoulders generated a
sensitivity of 68% (95% CI=51%, 75%), a specificity of 62% (95% CI=47%, 80%), a
positive likelihood ratio of 1.79 (95% CI=1.1, 2.9), and a negative likelihood ratio of
0.55 (95% CI=0.4, 0.8).
Limitations. Clinical therapists involved in the routine care of patients conducted
the fingerbreadth palpation method. It is likely that they were aware of the patients’
subluxation status.
Conclusion. The ultrasound method can detect minor asymmetry (<0.5 cm) and
has the potential advantage over the fingerbreadth palpation method of identifying
patients with minor subluxation.