Association between Multidisciplinary Care and Survival for Elderly Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease

Brenda R. Hemmelgarn,*[†] Braden J. Manns,*[‡] Jianguo Zhang,* Marcello Tonelli,†§ Scott Klarenbach,†§ Michael Walsh,* and Bruce F. Culleton;* for the Alberta Kidney Disease Network

Departments of *Medicine and *Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, and *Institute of Health Economics and *Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada*

The effectiveness of multidisciplinary care (MDC) in improving health outcomes for patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) is uncertain. This study sought to determine the association among MDC, survival, and risk for hospitalization among elderly outpatients with CKD. A total of 6978 patients who were 66 yr and older and had CKD were identified between July 1 and December 31, 2001, and followed to December 31, 2004; 187 (2.7%) were followed in an MDC clinic. Logistic regression was used to determine the propensity score (probability of MDC) for each patient, and MDC and non-MDC patients then were matched 1:1 on the basis of their score. A Cox model was used to determine the association between MDC and risk for death and hospitalization. After adjustment for age, gender, baseline GFR, diabetes, and comorbidity score, there was a 50% reduction in the risk for death for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group (hazard ratio [HR] 0.50; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.35 to 0.71). There was no difference in the risk for all-cause (HR 0.83; 95% CI 0.64 to 1.06) or cardiovascular-specific hospitalization (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.54 to 1.06) for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group. In conclusion, it was found that MDC was associated with a significant reduction in the risk for all-cause mortality and, although not statistically significant, a trend toward a reduction in risk for all-cause and cardiovascular-specific hospitalizations. The benefits of MDC and an assessment of their economic impact should be tested in a randomized, controlled trial.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common and is associated with a poor prognosis, including the development of premature cardiovascular disease and increased mortality (1–5). Given the multiple comorbidities and complexity of care for patients with CKD, it has been proposed that multidisciplinary care (MDC) that is delivered by an interdisciplinary health care team may improve health outcomes in this patient population (6–8).

MDC clinics are being used by the majority of nephrology programs in North America (9), even though their effectiveness in improving morbidity and mortality outcomes for patients with CKD largely is unknown. Although observational studies suggested a survival advantage with MDC (10,11), these studies were limited to patients who initiated dialysis, thereby introducing a potential survival bias. An earlier randomized trial of patients with CKD found no effect of MDC compared with usual care on decline in kidney function, health care utilization, or mortality (12). A more recent randomized trial suggested that MDC was not associated with improvement in vascular structure or function in patients with stages 4 and 5 CKD (13), although a psychoeducational intervention alone did demonstrate an extension in time to initiation of renal replacement therapy and improved survival (14,15). However, these trials have limitations, including reliance on primary care physicians to implement recommendations (12), inclusion of patients who already are on dialysis (13), and an educational intervention administered without MDC as it currently exists (14,15). In contrast, randomized trials of MDC in other chronic disease conditions have been shown to result in improved morbidity and mortality (16–20). Given the uncertainty with respect to the effectiveness and the resource intensity that is associated with MDC, we sought to determine the association among MDC, survival, and risk for hospitalization among elderly outpatients with CKD, compared with usual care.