Defibrillation Strategies for Refractory Ventricular Fibrillation

Published November 6, 2022

Abstract

Background
Despite advances in defibrillation technology, shock-refractory ventricular fibrillation remains common during out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Double sequential external defibrillation (DSED; rapid sequential shocks from two defibrillators) and vector-change (VC) defibrillation (switching defibrillation pads to an anterior–posterior position) have been proposed as defibrillation strategies to improve outcomes in patients with refractory ventricular fibrillation.

Methods
We conducted a cluster-randomized trial with crossover among six Canadian paramedic services to evaluate DSED and VC defibrillation as compared with standard defibrillation in adult patients with refractory ventricular fibrillation during out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Patients were treated with one of these three techniques according to the strategy that was randomly assigned to the paramedic service. The primary outcome was survival to hospital discharge. Secondary outcomes included termination of ventricular fibrillation, return of spontaneous circulation, and a good neurologic outcome, defined as a modified Rankin scale score of 2 or lower (indicating no symptoms to slight disability) at hospital discharge.

Results
A total of 405 patients were enrolled before the data and safety monitoring board stopped the trial because of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. A total of 136 patients (33.6%) were assigned to receive standard defibrillation, 144 (35.6%) to receive VC defibrillation, and 125 (30.9%) to receive DSED. Survival to hospital discharge was more common in the DSED group than in the standard group (30.4% vs. 13.3%; relative risk, 2.21; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.33 to 3.67) and more common in the VC group than in the standard group (21.7% vs. 13.3%; relative risk, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.01 to 2.88). DSED but not VC defibrillation was associated with a higher percentage of patients having a good neurologic outcome than standard defibrillation (relative risk, 2.21 [95% CI, 1.26 to 3.88] and 1.48 [95% CI, 0.81 to 2.71], respectively).

Conclusions
Among patients with refractory ventricular fibrillation, survival to hospital discharge occurred more frequently among those who received DSED or VC defibrillation than among those who received standard defibrillation. (Funded by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada; DOSE VF ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04080986.)

Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest accounts for more than 350,000 unexpected deaths each year in North America; nearly 100,000 of these cardiac arrests are attributed to ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia.1 Patients presenting with ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia have a higher survival rate than patients with other rhythms. However, despite advances in defibrillator technology, almost half these patients may remain in refractory ventricular fibrillation despite multiple defibrillation attempts.2-5 In these patients, further defibrillation without modification of the defibrillation method is usually unsuccessful. Although antiarrhythmic medications such as amiodarone and lidocaine have been used to prevent refibrillation, neither drug has been definitively shown to improve survival to hospital discharge or neurologically intact survival.6
Double sequential external defibrillation (DSED), the technique of providing rapid sequential shocks from two defibrillators with defibrillation pads placed in two different planes (anterior–lateral and anterior–posterior), has been studied for decades in the electrophysiology laboratory for use in patients with refractory atrial or ventricular fibrillation.7-10 Vector-change (VC) defibrillation, the technique of switching defibrillation pads from the anterior–lateral to the anterior–posterior position, offers the theoretical potential to defibrillate a portion of the ventricle that may not be completely defibrillated by pads in the standard anterior–lateral position. The use of DSED and VC defibrillation in settings outside the hospital has been described in case reports, observational studies, and systematic reviews.11-16 These reports describe cases or series in which DSED was used as a last-resort therapeutic option for patients who remained in refractory ventricular fibrillation, and therefore these studies may have been confounded by resuscitation time bias or the late application of a defibrillation strategy in a subgroup of patients for whom a positive outcome was unlikely.17 It has been suggested that early application of DSED may be associated with higher rates of termination of ventricular fibrillation and return of spontaneous circulation than standard defibrillation.13 The objective of this trial (Double Sequential External Defibrillation for Refractory Ventricular Fibrillation [DOSE VF]) was to evaluate DSED and VC defibrillation as compared with standard defibrillation in patients who remain in refractory ventricular fibrillation during out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
