Trial of Tocilizumab in Giant-Cell Arteritis

Authors: John H. Stone, M.D., M.P.H., Katie Tuckwell, Ph.D., Sophie Dimonaco, M.Sc., Micki Klearman, M.D., Martin Aringer, M.D., Daniel Blockmans, M.D., Ph.D., Elisabeth Brouwer, M.D., Ph.D., Maria C. Cid, M.D., Bhaskar Dasgupta, M.B., B.S., M.D., Juergen Rech, M.D., Carlo Salvarani, M.D., Georg Schett, M.D., Hendrik Schulze-Koops, M.D., Ph.D., Robert Spiera, M.D., Sebastian H. Unizony, M.D., and Neil Collinson, Ph.D.

Published July 27, 2017

Abstract
Background
Giant-cell arteritis commonly relapses when glucocorticoids are tapered, and the prolonged use of glucocorticoids is associated with side effects. The effect of the interleukin-6 receptor alpha inhibitor tocilizumab on the rates of relapse during glucocorticoid tapering was studied in patients with giant-cell arteritis.

Methods
In this 1-year trial, we randomly assigned 251 patients, in a 2:1:1:1 ratio, to receive subcutaneous tocilizumab (at a dose of 162 mg) weekly or every other week, combined with a 26-week prednisone taper, or placebo combined with a prednisone taper over a period of either 26 weeks or 52 weeks. The primary outcome was the rate of sustained glucocorticoid-free remission at week 52 in each tocilizumab group as compared with the rate in the placebo group that underwent the 26-week prednisone taper. The key secondary outcome was the rate of remission in each tocilizumab group as compared with the placebo group that underwent the 52-week prednisone taper. Dosing of prednisone and safety were also assessed.

Results
Sustained remission at week 52 occurred in 56% of the patients treated with tocilizumab weekly and in 53% of those treated with tocilizumab every other week, as compared with 14% of those in the placebo group that underwent the 26-week prednisone taper and 18% of those in the placebo group that underwent the 52-week prednisone taper (P<0.001 for the comparisons of either active treatment with placebo). The cumulative median prednisone dose over the 52-week period was 1862 mg in each tocilizumab group, as compared with 3296 mg in the placebo group that underwent the 26-week taper (P<0.001 for both comparisons) and 3818 mg in the placebo group that underwent the 52-week taper (P<0.001 for both comparisons). Serious adverse events occurred in 15% of the patients in the group that received tocilizumab weekly, 14% of those in the group that received tocilizumab every other week, 22% of those in the placebo group that underwent the 26-week taper, and 25% of those in the placebo group that underwent the 52-week taper. Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy developed in one patient in the group that received tocilizumab every other week.

Conclusions
Tocilizumab, received weekly or every other week, combined with a 26-week prednisone taper was superior to either 26-week or 52-week prednisone tapering plus placebo with regard to sustained glucocorticoid-free remission in patients with giant-cell arteritis. Longer follow-up is necessary to determine the durability of remission and safety of tocilizumab. (Funded by F. Hoffmann–La Roche; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01791153.)
Giant-cell arteritis causes headaches, ischemic visual symptoms, vision loss, claudication of the jaw, claudication of the arms and legs, polymyalgia rheumatica, aortic aneurysm, myocardial infarction, and stroke.1,2 Giant-cell arteritis generally occurs in adults older than 50 years of age and is 3 times as likely to occur in women as in men.1 Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment because they control headaches and systemic inflammation, normalize inflammatory markers, and prevent vision loss.3–5 However, many patients receive long or repeated glucocorticoid courses to prevent disease flares.3,4,6–9 Long-term use of glucocorticoids is associated with side effects.3,7,8,10 Therefore, treatments that are capable of maintaining the remission of giant-cell arteritis after the discontinuation of glucocorticoids would be valuable.
The concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) and other acute-phase reactants that are increased by elevated serum levels of interleukin-6 correlate with disease activity.11–17 Case series and a phase 2 trial have suggested that tocilizumab, an interleukin-6 receptor alpha inhibitor, allows for reductions in glucocorticoid doses that are used to control giant-cell arteritis and to maintain remission.18–26
We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, the Giant-Cell Arteritis Actemra (GiACTA) trial, to investigate whether tocilizumab resulted in higher rates of sustained glucocorticoid-free remission of giant-cell arteritis than placebo through a period of 52 weeks.27,28 Results from the 1-year trial are presented.
