A Randomized Trial of Convalescent Plasma in Covid-19 Severe Pneumonia
Authors: Ventura A. Simonovich, M.D., Leandro D. Burgos Pratx, M.D., Paula Scibona, M.D., María V. Beruto, M.D., Marcelo G. Vallone, M.D., Carolina Vázquez, M.D., Nadia Savoy, M.D., Diego H. Giunta, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8427-6033, Lucía G. Pérez, M.D., Marisa del L. Sánchez, M.D., Andrea Vanesa Gamarnik, Ph.D., Diego S. Ojeda, Ph.D., Diego M. Santoro, M.D., Pablo J. Camino, M.D., Sebastian Antelo, M.D., Karina Rainero, M.D., Gabriela P. Vidiella, M.D., Erica A. Miyazaki, M.D., Wanda Cornistein, M.D., Omar A. Trabadelo, M.D., Fernando M. Ross, M.D., Mariano Spotti, M.D., Gabriel Funtowicz, M.D., Walter E. Scordo, M.D., Marcelo H. Losso, M.D., Inés Ferniot, M.D., Pablo E. Pardo, M.D., Eulalia Rodriguez, M.D., Pablo Rucci, M.D., Julieta Pasquali, M.D., Nora A. Fuentes, M.D. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4893-3374, Mariano Esperatti, M.D., Ph.D., Gerardo A. Speroni, M.D., Esteban C. Nannini, M.D., Alejandra Matteaccio, M.D., Hernán G. Michelangelo, M.D., Dean Follmann, Ph.D., H. Clifford Lane, M.D., and Waldo H. Belloso, M.D., for the PlasmAr Study Group

Published November 24, 2020

Abstract

Background
Convalescent plasma is frequently administered to patients with Covid-19 and has been reported, largely on the basis of observational data, to improve clinical outcomes. Minimal data are available from adequately powered randomized, controlled trials.

Methods
We randomly assigned hospitalized adult patients with severe Covid-19 pneumonia in a 2:1 ratio to receive convalescent plasma or placebo. The primary outcome was the patient’s clinical status 30 days after the intervention, as measured on a six-point ordinal scale ranging from total recovery to death.

Results
A total of 228 patients were assigned to receive convalescent plasma and 105 to receive placebo. The median time from the onset of symptoms to enrollment in the trial was 8 days (interquartile range, 5 to 10), and hypoxemia was the most frequent severity criterion for enrollment. The infused convalescent plasma had a median titer of 1:3200 of total SARS-CoV-2 antibodies (interquartile range, 1:800 to 1:3200). No patients were lost to follow-up. At day 30 day, no significant difference was noted between the convalescent plasma group and the placebo group in the distribution of clinical outcomes according to the ordinal scale (odds ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.52 to 1.35; P=0.46). Overall mortality was 10.96% in the convalescent plasma group and 11.43% in the placebo group, for a risk difference of −0.46 percentage points (95% CI, −7.8 to 6.8). Total SARS-CoV-2 antibody titers tended to be higher in the convalescent plasma group at day 2 after the intervention. Adverse events and serious adverse events were similar in the two groups.

Conclusions
No significant differences were observed in clinical status or overall mortality between patients treated with convalescent plasma and those who received placebo. (PlasmAr ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04383535.)

In late 2019, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in Wuhan, China, and has spread worldwide since then, infecting millions of people. Coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19), the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, has clinical manifestations ranging from no symptoms to respiratory failure. So far, only two agents have shown a degree of clinical efficacy in large randomized, controlled trials: remdesivir, in hospitalized patients with pulmonary disease, and dexamethasone, in hospitalized patients receiving oxygen.1,2
Convalescent plasma has been used for the treatment of infectious diseases for more than a century, under the assumption that passive immunization can “jump start” the immune system to control the evolution of the disease until a specific immune response is established in the infected person.3 Despite great interest, convalescent plasma has been clearly demonstrated to be of value only in the treatment of Argentine hemorrhagic fever, for which it is considered standard of care.4 Although predominantly open-label, nonrandomized trials have claimed efficacy of convalescent plasma in SARS, Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), influenza A (H1N1) in 2009, avian influenza (H5N1) and Ebola, conclusive data from randomized, controlled trials are lacking.5-8
Observational studies have consistently shown that convalescent plasma has an adequate safety profile in patients with Covid-19. An exploratory analysis in 4330 patients showed no significant difference in 7-day mortality between patients who received high-titer plasma and those who received low-titer plasma in the overall population, whereas 20% lower 7-day mortality was seen in the predefined subgroup of nonintubated patients who received higher-titer plasma than in those who received lower-titer plasma (14%, vs. 11%; P=0.03). In a post hoc analysis, 7-day mortality in nonintubated patients who were younger than 80 years of age and were treated within 72 hours after diagnosis was 6.3% in those receiving high-titer plasma and 11.3% in those receiving low-titer plasma (P=0.0008).9 A similar efficacy analysis from the Mayo Clinic included 3082 participants receiving a single unit of plasma among the 35,322 patients who had received plasma through the expanded-access program.10 After adjustment for baseline characteristics, the 30-day mortality rate was 29.1% in the low-titer group and 24.7% in the high-titer group; the difference did not reach statistical significance. A post hoc subgroup analysis also suggested a benefit of high-titer plasma in patients who received plasma within 3 days after Covid-19 diagnosis. On the basis of all available data, convalescent plasma is currently available for use in the United States under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) and has been widely used worldwide in the context of extended and compassionate use.11,12
In February 2020, the first imported case of Covid-19 was reported in Buenos Aires, and since then, the number of cases has been increasing steadily, reaching a total of more than 417,700 cases by the end of August.13 In an attempt to more clearly determine the effect of convalescent plasma in Covid-19, we planned and conducted the PlasmAr trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. The main hypothesis of this trial was that in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, treatment with convalescent plasma would be associated with improved clinical outcomes at 30 days.
