Is Endocan a Diagnostic Marker for Pneumonia After Cardiac Surgery? The ENDOLUNG Study
Andréa Perrotti, MDa ∙ Camille Chenevier-Gobeaux, MDf ∙ Fiona Ecarnot, MSb fiona.ecarnot@univ-fcomte.fr ∙ Karine Bardonnet, MDc ∙ Benoit Barrucand, MDd ∙ Guillaume Flicoteaux, MDd ∙ Philippe Lassalle, MDe ∙ Sidney Chocron, MD, PhDa 

Abstract

Background
Postoperative pneumonia is frequent after cardiac surgery and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. We tested the hypothesis that endocan is an early biomarker for the detection of pneumonia after cardiac surgery.

Methods
Between January and May 2016, 155 patients scheduled to undergo elective cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass were prospectively included in the study. Serum level of endocan was measured at five timepoints (preoperative, and at 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours after the end of surgery). Procalcitonin and C-reactive protein were measured at 24 and 72 hours. The preoperative and postoperative characteristics of the patients were recorded. Independent predictors of postoperative pneumonia were identified by logistic regression. Threshold values of endocan predictive of postoperative pneumonia were determined using receiver-operating characteristics curve analysis.

Results
Seventeen patients (11%) had pneumonia after surgery. Endocan greater than 3.7 ng/mL before induction of anesthesia, or greater than 12.1 ng/mL at 6 hours after surgery, as well body mass index higher than 27 kg/m2 and duration of surgery were independent predictors of postoperative pneumonia. At induction of anesthesia, an endocan cutoff value of 3.7 ng/mL had 65% sensitivity and 72% specificity for the prediction of postoperative pneumonia; whereas at 6 hours, with a cutoff value of 12.1 ng/mL, these values were 71% and 75%, respectively. The time saved by endocan dosage compared with clinical diagnosis of postoperative pneumonia was 96 hours.

Conclusions
This study shows that endocan is an early marker of postoperative pneumonia in patients after cardiac surgery.
Dr Chenevier-Gobeaux discloses a financial relationship with Roche Diagnostics and Brahms Thermo Fisher; and Dr Lassalle with Lunginnov.
The development of postoperative pneumonia is a frequent complication after cardiac surgery and is associated with increased inhospital morbidity and mortality [1]. The prevalence of ventilator-associated pneumonia after cardiac surgery is estimated to be between 5.7% and 21.6% [2]. A more serious form of lung injury is acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), affecting as many as 20% of patients, and associated with a mortality rate as high as 80% after cardiac surgery [3]. Various risk factors have been associated with the development of pulmonary complications in patients undergoing cardiac surgery, including the duration of mechanical ventilation, type of surgery, use of cardiopulmonary bypass, supine position during the first 24 hours, history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and transfusion-related acute lung injury [1, 2, 4].
Cardiac surgery and cardiopulmonary bypass trigger an acute and nonspecific inflammatory reaction [5, 6]. In this context, the diagnosis of infection is challenging, because conventional clinical and biological signs may be misleading [7]. Early detection of postoperative pneumonia makes it possible to initiate appropriate therapy more quickly in these patients. Endocan (also called endothelial cell-specific molecule 1 or ESM-1) is a proteoglycan produced and secreted by the lung endothelial cells [8, 9]. Endocan principally circulates in the bloodstream at a level of approximately 1 ng/mL in healthy subjects [10]. Blood endocan increases in the context of sepsis as a result of de novo synthesis and secretion induced by proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukins, and polysaccharides [8]. Recent studies have underlined the usefulness of endocan as an early predictor of acute lung injury or respiratory failure after major trauma and in septic shock patients [11, 12]. The aim of the present study was to assess whether endocan can be used as a diagnostic marker for postoperative pneumonia in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.
