β blockers to prevent decompensation of cirrhosis in patients with clinically significant portal hypertension (PREDESCI): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial

Càndid Villanueva*, Agustín Albillos, Joan Genescà, Joan C Garcia-Pagan, José L Calleja, Carles Aracil, Rafael Bañares, Rosa M Morillas, María Poca, Beatriz Peñas, Salvador Augustin, Juan G Abraldes, Edilmar Alvarado, Ferran Torres, Jaume Bosch*†

Summary
Background Clinical decompensation of cirrhosis is associated with poor prognosis. Clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH), defined by a hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) ≥10 mm Hg, is the strongest predictor of decompensation. This study aimed at assessing whether lowering HVPG with β blockers could decrease the risk of decompensation or death in compensated cirrhosis with CSPH.

Methods This study on β blockers to prevent decompensation of cirrhosis with portal hypertension (PREDESCI) was an investigator-initiated, double-blind, randomised controlled trial done in eight hospitals in Spain. We enrolled patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH without high-risk varices. All participants had HVPG measurements with assessment of acute HVPG-response to intravenous propranolol. Responders (HVPG-decrease ≥10%) were randomly assigned to propranolol (up to 160 mg twice a day) versus placebo and non-responders to carvedilol (≤25 mg/day) versus placebo. Doses were individually determined during an open-label titration period after which randomisation was done with 1:1 allocation by a centralised web-based system. The primary endpoint was incidence of cirrhosis decompensation (defined as development of ascites, bleeding, or overt encephalopathy) or death. Since death in compensated cirrhosis is usually unrelated to the liver, an intention-to-treat analysis considering deaths unrelated to the liver as competing events was done. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01059396. The trial is now completed.

Findings Between Jan 18, 2010, and July 31, 2013, 631 patients were evaluated and 201 were randomly assigned. 101 patients received placebo and 100 received active treatment (67 propranolol and 33 carvedilol). The primary endpoint occurred in 16 (16%) of 100 patients in the β blockers group versus 27 (27%) of 101 in the placebo group (hazard ratio [HR] 0·51, 95% CI 0·26–0·97, p=0·041). The difference was due to a reduced incidence of ascites (HR=0·44, 95%CI=0·20–0·97, p=0·0297). The overall incidence of adverse events was similar in both groups. Six patients (four in the β blockers group) had severe adverse events.

Interpretation Long-term treatment with β blockers could increase decompensation-free survival in patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH, mainly by reducing the incidence of ascites.



Introduction
Liver cirrhosis evolves over time from a compensated to a decompensated stage, defined by the occurrence of ascites, variceal haemorrhage or hepatic encephalopathy. The decompensation of cirrhosis determines a markedly declined life expectancy. Portal hypertension is the main determinant of decompensation. A portal pressure ≥10 mm Hg, usually estimated by the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG), defines clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH) as both varices and decompensation might appear after reaching this threshold. In patients with CSPH and large varices, non-selective β blockers effectively prevent variceal bleeding and reduce bleeding-related mortality. However, in the timolol-trial β blockers were ineffective in preventing the development of varices in compensated cirrhosis with or without CSPH. β blockers lower portal pressure by decreasing portal venous inflow, which in CSPH is increased because of hyperdynamic circulation. Patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH have more advanced hyperdynamic circulation than do those without CSPH. This finding is associated with much greater HVPG reduction by β blockers in patients with CSPH than in those without. These observations suggest that β blockers might prevent decompensation in patients with CSPH, who were precisely those at risk of developing varices and decompensation in the timolol trial.

Research in context
Evidence before this study Liver cirrhosis evolves over time from a compensated to a decompensated stage, which is associated with a marked decline in life expectancy. Portal hypertension (PH) is the main determinant of the progression to clinical decompensation, defined by the occurrence of ascites, bleeding, or encephalopathy. A portal pressure gradient ≥10 mm Hg defines clinically significant PH (CSPH), since decompensation might appear after reaching this threshold. Indeed, CSPH is the strongest predictor of clinical decompensation. Non-selective β blockers (NSBB) lower portal pressure by decreasing portal venous inflow, which is increased in patients with CSPH, but much less in those without CSPH, in whom the response to NSBB is almost negligible. We searched PubMed, Embase and the Cochrane Library (Feb 28, 2018), for clinical trials evaluating drug therapies to prevent decompensation of cirrhosis, without language or date restrictions. We used the terms “compensated cirrhosis”, “prevent decompensation”, “prevent ascites”, “prevent bleeding”, “prevent encephalopathy”, and “β-blockers”. We identified numerous randomised controlled trials and meta-analyses showing that NSBB effectively prevent first variceal bleeding. Only one randomised controlled trial evaluated whether NSBB could prevent the development of varices in compensated cirrhosis, but this study failed to demonstrate any beneficial effect. This negative result might have been due to the fact that part of the patients included had no CSPH, and therefore were very unlikely to respond to NSBB and to develop decompensation. On the other hand, current European (Baveno VI) and American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) recommendations indicate that the aim of treatment of portal hypertension in patients with compensated cirrhosis should be to prevent decompensation, rather than focusing only on variceal bleeding. However, no randomised controlled trial with this endpoint has been conducted so far. The present cooperative, double-blind randomised controlled trial aimed at investigating whether long-term treatment of patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH with NSBB might prevent progression to clinical decompensation or death. Added value of this study The present double-blind randomised controlled trial is the first study showing that long-term treatment with NSBB decreases approximately by half the risk of clinical decompensation or liver-related death. This is mainly due to a decreased likelihood of developing ascites, which is the most common and severe decompensating event, for which previously there was no effective preventive drug therapy. As a likely explanation of the beneficial effects of therapy, the study shows that NSBB, but not placebo, significantly reduced the portal pressure gradient at each yearly control. Implications of all the available evidence Our finding that in patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH continued therapy with NSBB significantly reduces the incidence of decompensation or death represents a landmark innovation in the management of patients with cirrhosis. It has important implications in clinical practice, suggesting that patients with compensated cirrhosis should be screened for development of CSPH, and that therapy with NSBB should be started from its detection, which nowadays can be done quite confidently using non-invasive tools, such as transient elastography (alone or associated with platelet count or spleen diameter measurements). This new indication of NSBB might have a major impact on patients’ outcomes, health-care burden and costs, which would likely influence future clinical guidelines. Future research should confirm that it is indeed possible to accurately detect CSPH in patients with compensated cirrhosis using simple non-invasive methods, and further define specific biomarkers of response to therapy.


The present study aimed at assessing whether, in patients with compensated cirrhosis and CSPH, long-term treatment with β blockers might prevent disease progression to clinical decompensation or death.
