Oxygen Therapy in Suspected Acute Myocardial Infarction
Authors: Robin Hofmann, M.D., Stefan K. James, M.D., Ph.D., Tomas Jernberg, M.D., Ph.D., Bertil Lindahl, M.D., Ph.D., David Erlinge, M.D., Ph.D., Nils Witt, M.D., Ph.D., Gabriel Arefalk, M.D., Mats Frick, M.D., Ph.D., Joakim Alfredsson, M.D., Ph.D., Lennart Nilsson, M.D., Ph.D., Annica Ravn-Fischer, M.D., Ph.D., Elmir Omerovic, M.D., Ph.D., Thomas Kellerth, M.D., David Sparv, B.Sc., Ulf Ekelund, M.D., Ph.D., Rickard Linder, M.D., Ph.D., Mattias Ekström, M.D., Ph.D., Jörg Lauermann, M.D., Urban Haaga, B.Sc., John Pernow, M.D., Ph.D., Ollie Östlund, Ph.D., Johan Herlitz, M.D., Ph.D., and Leif Svensson, M.D., Ph.D., for the DETO2X–SWEDEHEART Investigators*

Published September 28, 2017

Abstract

Background
The clinical effect of routine oxygen therapy in patients with suspected acute myocardial infarction who do not have hypoxemia at baseline is uncertain.

Methods
In this registry-based randomized clinical trial, we used nationwide Swedish registries for patient enrollment and data collection. Patients with suspected myocardial infarction and an oxygen saturation of 90% or higher were randomly assigned to receive either supplemental oxygen (6 liters per minute for 6 to 12 hours, delivered through an open face mask) or ambient air.

Results
A total of 6629 patients were enrolled. The median duration of oxygen therapy was 11.6 hours, and the median oxygen saturation at the end of the treatment period was 99% among patients assigned to oxygen and 97% among patients assigned to ambient air. Hypoxemia developed in 62 patients (1.9%) in the oxygen group, as compared with 254 patients (7.7%) in the ambient-air group. The median of the highest troponin level during hospitalization was 946.5 ng per liter in the oxygen group and 983.0 ng per liter in the ambient-air group. The primary end point of death from any cause within 1 year after randomization occurred in 5.0% of patients (166 of 3311) assigned to oxygen and in 5.1% of patients (168 of 3318) assigned to ambient air (hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.79 to 1.21; P=0.80). Rehospitalization with myocardial infarction within 1 year occurred in 126 patients (3.8%) assigned to oxygen and in 111 patients (3.3%) assigned to ambient air (hazard ratio, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.46; P=0.33). The results were consistent across all predefined subgroups.

Conclusions
Routine use of supplemental oxygen in patients with suspected myocardial infarction who did not have hypoxemia was not found to reduce 1-year all-cause mortality. (Funded by the Swedish Heart–Lung Foundation and others; DETO2X-AMI ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01787110.)

Myocardial infarction is caused by a mismatch of oxygen and substrate supply and demand in the myocardium that leads to ischemia and ultimately to cell death. Therefore, for more than a century, supplemental oxygen has been used routinely in the treatment of patients with suspected acute myocardial infarction1 and is recommended in clinical guidelines.2,3 The rationale behind oxygen therapy is to increase oxygen delivery to the ischemic myocardium and thereby limit infarct size and subsequent complications. The basis for this practice is limited to experimental laboratory data and small clinical studies.4–6 However, above-normal oxygen levels in the blood can cause coronary vasoconstriction7 and increase the production of reactive oxygen species,8 potentially contributing to reperfusion injury. Such a negative effect is supported by the Australian Air Versus Oxygen in Myocardial Infarction (AVOID) trial, which reported larger infarct sizes in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) who received oxygen than in those who did not receive oxygen.9 Furthermore, an updated Cochrane report10 from 2016 did not show any evidence supporting the routine use of oxygen in the treatment of patients with myocardial infarction. Trials powered to assess hard clinical end points with regard to oxygen use in this context are lacking. Thus, the efficacy of routine oxygen therapy in patients with myocardial infarction remains highly uncertain.
We therefore conducted a registry-based randomized clinical trial to evaluate the effect of oxygen therapy on all-cause mortality at 1 year among patients with suspected myocardial infarction who did not have hypoxemia at baseline.
