Assessment of Glenohumeral
Subluxation in Poststroke Hemiplegia:
Comparison Between Ultrasound and
Fingerbreadth Palpation Methods

Praveen Kumar, Marianne Mardon, Michael Bradley, Selena Cray,
Annette Swinkels

Background. Glenohumeral subluxation (GHS) is a common poststroke compli­
cation. Treatment of GHS is hampered by the lack of objective, real-time clinical
measurements.
Objective. The aims of this study were: (1) to compare an ultrasound method of
GHS measurement with the fingerbreadth palpation method using a receiver oper­
ating characteristic curve (ROC) and (2) to report the sensitivity and specificity of this
method.
Design. A prospective study was conducted.
S etting. The study was conducted in local hospitals and day centers in the
southwest of England.
Patients. One hundred five patients who had one-sided weakness following a
first-time stroke (51 men, 54 women; mean age=71 years, SD=11) and who gave
informed consent were enrolled in the study.
Measurements. Ultrasound measurements of acromion-greater tuberosity
(AGT) distance were used for the assessment of GHS. Measurements were under­
taken on both shoulders by a research physical therapist trained in shoulder ultra­
sound with the patient seated in a standardized position. Fingerbreadth palpation
assessment of GHS was undertaken by a clinical physical therapist based at the
hospital, who also visited the day centers.
Results. The area under the ROC curve was 0.73 (95% confidence interval [95%
Cl] =0.63, 0.83), suggesting that the ultrasound method has good agreement com­
pared with the fingerbreadth palpation method. A cutoff point of £0.2 cm AGT
measurement difference between affected and unaffected shoulders generated a
sensitivity of 68% (95% CI=51%, 75%), a specificity of 62% (95% CI=47%, 80%), a
positive likelihood ratio of 1.79 (95% CI=1.1, 2.9), and a negative likelihood ratio of
0.55 (95% CI=0.4, 0.8).
Limitations. Clinical therapists involved in the routine care of patients conducted
the fingerbreadth palpation method. It is likely that they were aware of the patients’
subluxation status.
Conclusion. The ultrasound method can detect minor asymmetry (<0.5 cm) and
has the potential advantage over the fingerbreadth palpation method of identifying
patients with minor subluxation.

Glenohumeral subluxation
(GHS) is a recognized compli­
cation in people with post­
stroke hemiplegia. The reported inci­
dence of GHS ranges from 17% to
81% of patients, depending on the
measurement methods used and the
time frames over which it is
assessed.1-2 Severe loss of motor
function and apparent absence of
supraspinatus muscle contraction
are potential risk factors for GHS, but
scapular orientation does not con­
tribute to GHS, as was originally
thought.3 The association between
GHS and other poststroke complica­
tions such as pain and poor motor
recovery is uncertain. When present
in combination, however, these
complications could have a signifi­
cant impact on upper limb func­
tion.4 The management of GHS,
therefore, is an important therapeu­
tic goal, and various approaches
have been used in its prevention and
treatment.56 Current approaches
have significant problems and limita­
tions to their use, and the effective­
ness of any one of these approaches
for the treatment of GHS is inconclu­
sive.7 A potential reason for these
findings is the lack of reliable, objec­
tive, real-time clinical measure­
ments.8 Current clinical measure­
ments include the fingerbreadth
palpation method9 and plain
radiographs.610
The fingerbreadth palpation method
lacks the sensitivity to detect early
signs of GHS or minor subluxations.8
There is a concern that without treat­
ment, subluxation can progress to an
uncorrectable level over time.6 Early
GHS can contribute to irreversible
partial or complete tears of the non­
elastic shoulder capsule.5611 Radio­
graphs are considered to be objec­
tive and have high reliability and
validity,12 but problems relating to
cost, time involved, and risks inher­
ent to exposure to radiation13 limit
their utility in the clinical setting. In
addition, radiographic diagnosis is not generally recommended for clin­
ical evaluation of GHS.14
Diagnostic ultrasound is now rou­
tinely used for clinical imaging of the
shoulder region in patients with
musculoskeletal conditions.15-18
Recently, several studies used diag­
nostic ultrasound to evaluate the
incidence and prevalence of soft tis­
sue injuries (rotator cuff tears,
biceps tendinitis) in the shoulders of
people with poststroke hemiple­
gia.19-26 The ultrasound method is
currently being investigated and
developed for the assessment of GHS
in these patients2728; however, it is
not routinely used in clinical set­
tings. Using a large, static ultrasound
machine, Park et al27 reported high
intrarater reliability (intraclass corre­
lation coefficient [ICC] = .979) of
ultrasound measurements of GHS.
More recently, Kumar et al28
recruited 26 patients with stroke
and, using a new standardized posi­
tion with the forearm supported,
found that bedside assessment of
acromion-greater tuberosity (AGT)
distance, undertaken by a physical
therapist trained in shoulder ultra­
sound, demonstrated good intrarater
reliability (ICC=.980) and discrimi­
nant validity.
The purposes of this study were: (1)
to compare ultrasound and finger­
breadth palpation methods of GHS
measurements using a receiver oper­
ating characteristic (ROC) curve and
(2) to report the sensitivity and spec­
ificity of these methods. The finger­
breadth palpation method is rou­
tinely used in clinical practice and
has been tested for both reliability
and validity.29-31 Hall et al29 investi­
gated the concurrent validity of this
method by comparing it with plain
radiographs. They reported a Spear­
man correlation coefficient of .760
between the fingerbreadth palpation
method and plain radiographs. This
study continued this research by comparing ultrasound and finger­
breadth palpation methods.
Method
Participants
The study used a prospective design
and received approval from the
National Health Service (NHS)
Research Ethics Committee, North
Bristol Trust, United Kingdom.
Patients over 50 years of age who
had stroke resulting in one-sided
weakness and who were able to sit
upright were eligible to participate.
Patients with aphasia also were eligi­
ble to participate in the study. Apha­
sia was confirmed if a patient had
difficulty following simple com­
mands, understanding questions
(receptive aphasia), or speaking
(expressive aphasia). Diagnosis or
presence of GHS was not a require­
ment to be able to participate in the
study. Patients with other neurologic
conditions, traumatic brain injury,
brain tumors or other serious comor­
bidities, shoulder pathology, or
recent surgery to the neck, arm, or
shoulder; those who were unavail­
able for testing; and those who were
unable to volunteer due to any rea­
son were excluded.
An a priori power calculation was
performed for assessing the clinical
utility of the ultrasound method as
quantified by the area under the
receiver operating characteristic
(AUROC) curve. To our knowledge,
this is the first study of this topic
using AUROC curve statistics. There­
fore, power calculations were con­
ducted for 2 AUROC curve values.
For standard level of significance (a=.05, /3<.20), a minimum sample
size of n=72 and n = 114 would have
at least 80% power to determine sta­
tistical significance if the true
AUROC was equal to 0.70 and 0.65,
respectively, assuming a 1:1 ratio
between negative and positive cases
in the sample (calculations were per­
formed using MedCalc Software, ver­
sion 11.1, Mariakerke, Belgium).
Therefore, the aim of this study was
to recruit up to 114 patients with
stroke.
Patients were recruited from 4 local
hospital trusts in the southwest of
England and from the community by
accessing the Bristol Area Stroke
Foundation (BASF), a voluntary orga­
nization that operates social clubs in
a number of day centers for patients
with stroke in Bristol. Of the several
BASF social clubs, 6 centers located
in and around the Bristol area were
approached for the recruitment of
patients. Each patient gave informed
written consent to take part, and, for
those who lacked mental capacity,
appropriate procedures were fol­
lowed and involved a family member
signing the personal consultee agree­
ment form in the presence of the
patient.

A p p a ra tu s an d Raters
Prior to commencement of the data
collection process, a portable diag­
nostic ultrasound machine (TITAN
model, L38/10-5 MHz broadband,
Sonosite Ltd, Hitchin, United King­
dom) was tested and calibrated
according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines.
Ultrasound measurements of ACT
distance were undertaken by a phys­
ical therapist (P.K.) at all of the
research sites (hospital and day cen­
ters). The training protocol con­
sisted of a 1-day manufacturer’s
course, supervised training from a
consultant radiologist, pilot work on
6 healthy volunteers, and reliability
studies on healthy volunteers32 and
patients with stroke (n=64).28
Clinical assessment of GHS (using
the fingerbreadth palpation method)
was performed by one of the senior
clinical physical therapists (NHS
bands 6 -8 ) at each local hospital
trust and at the day centers. Seven
physical therapists with 4 to 15 years
of experience in stroke rehabilita­
tion were involved with clinical
assessments of GHS. To ensure stan­
dardization and familiarization with
the testing procedure, each physical therapist practiced the standardized
protocol on 2 patients with stroke in
the presence of the chief researcher
(P.K.). Any issues arising were dis­
cussed and clarified at this stage.
During actual data collection, physi­
cal therapists undertook measure­
ments independently.
P ro ced u re
Baseline demographic data, includ­
ing age, sex, date of onset, type of
stroke, site of stroke, and side
affected, were collected from
patients’ medical records by the
chief researcher. For patients at day
centers, only age, sex, and date of
stroke were gathered directly from
the patients, as no medical records
were available. Assessments were
conducted at the hospital bedside or
in the day centers. The therapist
undertaking clinical assessment of
GHS was blinded to ultrasound mea­
surements of AGT distance, and the
therapist undertaking ultrasound
measurements was blinded to clini­
cal assessment. The order of data col­
lection was as follows.
C linical assessm ent o f G HS by a
clinical physical th e ra p is t using
th e fin g e rb re a d th p a lp a tio n
m e th o d . A standardized protocol
was used.29 Patients were seated in a
chair or wheelchair with both feet
flat on the ground or on a footrest.
The physical therapist first assessed
the unaffected side to palpate the
gap between the acromion and the
head of the humerus, and this assess­
ment was repeated on the affected
shoulder. Shoulders were positioned
in neutral rotation, with the arm
hanging by the side (thumb pointing
forward) close to the body with no
abduction (Fig. 1). Some patients
who demonstrated high tone were
unable to hang their affected arm
freely by the side. For these patients,
the shoulder was maintained in inter­
nal rotation with slight elbow flexion
and the forearm resting on their lap.
Glenohumeral subluxation was defined as a palpable gap betw een
the inferior aspect of the acromion
and the superior aspect of the
humeral head that is Vi fingerbreadth
or more. A 0 -5 grading scheme was
used: 0 = n o subluxation, 1= Vi fin­
gerbreadth gap, 2=1 fingerbreadth
gap, 3 —1Vi fingerbreadth gap, 4=2
fingerbreadth gap, and 5 = 2Vi finger­
breadth gap.29 
Ultrasound m easurem ents of
A C T distance by th e chief
researcher. For ultrasound mea­
surements of AGT distance, each
patient was placed in the standard­
ized position to allow measurement
of AGT distance (Fig. I).32 The shoul­
der was in neutral rotation, with the
elbow at 90 degrees of flexion and
the forearm in pronation. The fore­
arms rested on a pillow placed on
the patient’s lap with the elbow joint
itself remaining unsupported. Assis­
tance was provided by the
researcher if the patient was unable
to move the arm. The ultrasound
transducer then was placed over the
lateral border of acromion along
the vertical/longitudinal axis of the
humerus to scan the shoulder. The
AGT distance was recorded on the
frozen image using an on-screen cal­
iper that automatically calculates dis­
tances (Fig. 2). The AGT distance
was defined as the relative lateral dis­
tance betw een the lateral edge of the
acromial process of the scapula and
the nearest margin of the superior
part of the greater tuberosity of the
hum erus.32 A dark linear acoustic
shadow beneath the acromion
helped to identify the lateral edge of
the acromion. The supraspinatus
tendon was clearly visible as a thick
band (acoustic hyperechoic appear­
ance) at its point of insertion, which
facilitated identification of the
greater tuberosity (Fig 2). Three
ultrasound images of the right shoul­
der w ere obtained, and AGT distance
was measured on each image. This
process was repeated on the left
shoulder. In order to ensure the rater was blind to measurements, the val­
ues displayed w ere obscured by
placing a sticker on the ultrasound
screen.
A general neurological clinical
exam ination o f th e upper lim b by
th e chief researcher. The general
neurological examination included
assessment of muscle strength in the
shoulder muscles (Medical Research
Council Scale)33 and muscle tone34-35
on both affected and unaffected
sides. Muscle tone was classified as
low (grade 0), normal (grade 1), and
high (grades 2-5), as described by
Culham et al.35 For both muscle
strength and tone, the shoulder flex­
ors, abductors, and internal and
external rotators w ere assessed.
Data Analysis
Data w ere analyzed using SPSS (ver­
sion 19 0, IBM UK, Business Analyt­
ics, Middlesex, United Kingdom).
Descriptive statistics w ere used to
calculate the mean and standard
deviation of AGT distance measure­
ments for both affected and unaf­
fected shoulders. The difference
betw een affected and unaffected shoulders was considered a measure
of GHS based on the ultrasound
m ethod and was analyzed using
repeated-measures analysis of vari­
ance (ANOVA), and both sides
(affected and unaffected) and time
w ere considered as within-subject
factors. The standard error of mea­
surement (SEM) was calculated from
the ANOVA output. The minimum
detectable change w ith 90% confi­
dence interval (MDC90) was calcu­
lated using the formula: MDC90=
SEM X 1.65 X \ / 2 . 36'37
The association betw een the finger­
breadth palpation m ethod (differ­
ence betw een affected and unaf­
fected shoulders) and the ultrasound
m ethod was tested using Spearman
rank correlation coefficients. This
statistical test is used w hen one of
the m ethods (in this case, the finger­
breadth palpation m ethod) gener­
ates ordinal data rather than interval
or ratio data. Agreement betw een
the ultrasound and fingerbreadth pal­
pation methods was tested using the
ROC curve, the AUROC curve, sen­
sitivity, specificity, negative and pos­
itive predictive values, and likelihood ratios for different values of
ultrasound measurements of AGT
distance.

Role o f th e Funding Source
This research was undertaken as part
of Dr Kumar’s doctoral thesis, which
was funded by the University of the
West of England, Bristol, United
Kingdom.
Results
Over a 16-month period, 115
patients with stroke were
approached to participate in the
study. Ten patients were excluded
because they did not meet the inclu­
sion criteria. Of these patients, 3 had
serious comorbidities (intestinal can­
cer, heart problems), 1 was enrolled but withdrew before finishing data
collection, 1 was discharged from
the hospital prior to data collection,
and 5 could not visit the day center
on the day of data collection because
of personal reasons. Therefore, 105
patients agreed to participate and
were enrolled in the study: 70
patients were from hospital settings,
and 35 patients were from stroke day
centers. Of the recruited patients, 22
(21%) had aphasia. Seven patients
required alternative positioning (a
nonstandard modified sitting posi­
tion) due to the presence of high
tone.
A summary of the demographic char­
acteristics of the participants is
shown in Table 1. The mean AGT distance for the total sample
(n=105) was 2.2 cm (SD=0.6) and
1.8 cm (SD=0.4) for the stroke-
affected and stroke-unaffected shoul­
ders, respectively. On the stroke-
affected side, the minimum and
maximum AGT values recorded
across patients were 1.0 and 3.7 cm,
respectively, and the 95% confi­
dence intervals (95% CIs) ranged
from 2.0 to 2.3 cm. Corresponding
values for the unaffected shoulder
were 0.7, 3-2, and 1.7 to 1.9 cm. The
repeated-measures ANOVA showed
a significant mean AGT difference
between affected and unaffected
shoulder measurements (X=0.4 cm,
SD=0.5) (f75,52o=53.101, PC.001).
The SEM for the between-shoulder
difference in AGT was 0.08 cm, and
the MDC90 was ±0.2 cm.
Shoulder subluxation was present in
71 patients (67%) and absent in 34
patients (33%) using the finger-
breadth palpation method of assess­
ment. Of those with GHS, 31/71
(44%) had grade 1 (14-finger gap),
28/71 (39%) had grade 2 (1-finger
gap), 8/71 (11%) had grade 3 (1 96-
finger gap), and 4/71 (6%) had grade
4 (2-finger gap) subluxation.
The Spearman rank correlation coef­
ficients showed a moderate correla­
tion (rs= .52) between the 2 meth­
ods, and this correlation was
statistically significant ( P C .001). The
ROC curve allows seeing, in a simple
visual display, how sensitivity and
specificity vary around different cut­
off points (curved line) (Fig. 3). The
AUROC curve can have any value
between 0 and 1, and a test could be
regarded as excellent or not useful
based on the following categories:
0.9-TO (excellent), 0.8-0.9 (very
good), 0.7-0.8 (good), 0.6-0.7 (suf­
ficient), 0.5-0.6 (bad), and <0.5
(test has no diagnostic value).3839 If
the AUROC curve value is 0.9 to 1.0
(ie, closer to the upper left-hand cor­
ner of the ROC curve), it demon­
strates excellent agreement between the tests. In contrast, if the value is
^0.5 (ie, on or below the straight
line), it suggests that there is poor
agreement between the tests39
(Fig. 3). The AUROC curve was 0.73
(95% 0=0.63, 0.83). Based on the
AUROC curve, there was a good
level of agreement between the
ultrasound and fingerbreadth palpa­
tion methods.
Conventionally, on an ROC graph, a
pair of diagnostic sensitivity and
specificity values for every individual
cutoff is plotted, with the sensitivity
on the y-axis and 1 minus specificity
on the x-axis. The sensitivity and
specificity for various cutoff points
are presented in Table 2. A cutoff
point of >0.2 cm AGT measurement
difference between affected and
unaffected shoulders could be con­
sidered optimal because it provides
the best trade-off between sensitivity
and specificity, with a sensitivity of
68% (95% 0=51% , 75%) and a spec­
ificity of 62% (95% 0=47% , 80%).
Using this cutoff point, the true value
for the sensitivity of the ultrasound
method is likely to be between 0.51
(the lower boundary of the Cl), 0.68
(the point estimate), and 0.75 (the
upper boundary of the Cl).
Using the optimal cutoff point of
s().2 cm, the usefulness of the ultra­
sound method is illustrated in the
eTable (available at ptjournal.apta.
org). Likelihood ratios summarize
how many times more or less likely
patients with subluxation are to have
a particular test result than patients
without subluxation. The positive
likelihood ratio of 1.79 suggests
that a patient with subluxation
(defined as grade of 1 or higher in
the 5-point fingerbreadth palpation
method) is 1.79 more likely to have
an AGT difference greater than
0.2 cm on ultrasound than a patient
without palpable subluxation. The
flow diagram presented in Figure 4
illustrates the comparison of ultra­
sound method versus fingerbreadth palpation method. Using the ultra­
sound method, 61/105 patients
(58%) had a mean AGT difference
of >0.2 cm between the affected
and unaffected shoulders. Of those
patients with >0.2 cm AGT distance,
33/61 (54%) demonstrated a mean
AGT difference of between 0.2 and
0.5 cm, indicating minor asymmetry
between the unaffected and affected
shoulders.

D iscussion
The primary aims of this study were:
(1) to compare an ultrasound
method of GHS measurement with
the fingerbreadth palpation method
using an ROC curve and (2) to report
the sensitivity and specificity of
these methods. The AUROC curve
from this study was 0.73- Presented
with pairs of randomly selected
patients, one with GHS and one without GHS as determined by the
fingerbreadth palpation method, an
examiner would classify 73% of the
pairs correctly by choosing the one
whose AGT distance on ultrasound
was the larger of the two.
For the diagnostic ultrasound
method to be useful, it is important
to select a trade-off between sensitiv­
ity and specificity.40 The cutoff point
of >0.5 cm generated a sensitivity of
40% (eTable). Examiners who apply
a cutoff point of 0.5 cm while using
the ultrasound method would fail to
identify 6/10 patients judged by the
fingerbreadth palpation method to
have GHS. In contrast, a cutoff point
of >0.1 cm generates a sensitivity of
76%, indicating that the ultrasound
method would identify 8/10 patients
with subluxation. However, this
value is associated with a low speci­
ficity of 50%, indicating that 5/10
patients whose ultrasound measures
are asymmetrical by > 0 .1 cm or
more would have no evidence of
GHS on the fingerbreadth palpation
test. Unlike these cutoff points,
which generate high sensitivity and
low specificity or vice versa, a cutoff
point of >0.2 cm generates a sensi­
tivity of 68% and a specificity of 62%.
Based on the sensitivity statistic,
when the fingerbreadth palpation
test indicates GHS, in 68% of those
cases, the ultrasound measure also
would indicate GHS.
The cutoff point of ^0.2 cm (where
the sensitivity is 0.68) may be con­
sidered optimal because it helps to
“rule out” GHS by indicating that,
among patients with subluxation
(defined as a grade of 1 or higher on
the 5-point palpation scale), 68% will
have an AGT difference of at least 0.2
cm. This finding suggests that ultra­
sound potentially could be used as a
screening tool, which is critical
because early diagnosis of GHS
would facilitate the application of
appropriate treatment and thereby
potentially prevent the long-term complications associated with GHS.
Furthermore, a cutoff point of >0.2
cm (where the test’s specificity is
0.62) indicates that, with a predicted
false-positive result of 0.38, among
those who demonstrate no sublux­
ation (a grade of 0 on the 5-point
fingerbreadth palpation scale), 62%
will have an AGT difference of less
than 0.2 cm. Specificity is equally
important because applying treat­
ment such as positioning (arm
troughs, lap boards), shoulder slings,
or strapping to a patient without
GHS could reduce the normal gap
between the acromion and the head
of the humerus. This position could
alter the normal scapulohumeral
rhythm required for smooth move­
ment at the shoulder joint resulting
in compression of the rotator cuff
tendons under the acromion pro­
cess, which can cause tearing of
these structures and result in sub­
acromial impingement.19
The cutoff point of >0.2 cm also
coincides with the MDC90 value of
±0.2 cm, which is in agreement
with the findings of a previous
study.28 Kumar et al,28 in a study of
26 patients with stroke, reported a
mean AGT difference of 0.4 cm and
an MDC90 value of ±0.2 cm between
affected and unaffected shoulders. A
study of healthy individuals (n=32;
mean age 64 years, SD= 11) showed
a mean AGT difference of 0.1 cm
(SD=0.18) (95% CI=0.03, 0.17) and
MDC90 value of ±0.07 cm between
right and left shoulders.32 Based on
the MDC90 values from these studies,
it could be predicted that a change
of ±0.2 cm in AGT distance mea­
surements between affected and
unaffected shoulders would be nec­
essary to indicate an asymmetry that
is not due to measurement error.
In this study, a mean AGT difference
of ^0.5 cm between affected and
unaffected shoulders was observed
in 33 patients, suggesting minor sub­
luxation. It is critical to identify minor subluxation in its early stage,
as application of appropriate treat­
ment can improve upper limb motor
function.5-6 Several studies have
reported on the benefits of func­
tional electrical stimulation in the
prevention and treatment of GHS in
early stages of rehabilitation5-41’43
but not in patients with chronic
stroke (> 6 months).6 Findings from
these studies suggest that GHS can
be prevented by the application of
appropriate treatment but that with­
drawal of treatment can lead to sub­
sequent subluxation, especially in
patients with loss of voluntary con­
trol. In the United Kingdom, there­
fore, the latest national guidelines for
stroke44 recommend application of
functional electrical stimulation to
the supraspinatus and deltoid mus­
cles for any patient with stroke who
has developed, or is at risk of devel­
oping, GHS. Ultrasound has the
potential advantage of identifying
patients with even minor sublux­
ation (<0.5 cm) and can provide
objective measurements in the early
stages of rehabilitation.
In contrast, the fingerbreadth palpa­
tion method has the potential advan­
tage of being a quick, equipment-
free method of identifying significant
subluxation. However, it lacks the
ability to detect early signs of sublux­
ation,8 is subjective,8-12-31 and is
insensitive, as it cannot detect differ­
ences of less than 0.5 cm .12 Further­
more, the reported correlations for
the concurrent validity of the finger­
breadth palpation method in com­
parison with radiographic measure­
ments range from .69 to .76,29-31
which are described as relatively
low.45 Limitations of the finger­
breadth palpation method could
result in an underestimation of the
true prevalence of GHS, which could
contribute to the moderate correla­
tion and relatively low sensitivity and
specificity values for the ultrasound
method found in this study. Due to
resource, cost, and ethical constraints, it was not possible to under­
take radiographs of 210 shoulders.
Our study suggests that ultrasound
measurements of AGT have potential
value in the prevention and manage­
m ent of GHS in people w ith stroke.
The technique is safe, noninva-
sive,15-16-46-47 allows real-time mea­
surements,48 and requires limited
training to produce reliable measure­
m ents of AGT distance.28-32-4E,-5° Sev­
eral other benefits of diagnostic
ultrasound have been reported by
recent studies of people with
stroke.25-26 A recent study demon­
strated that subluxation occurred
more frequently in patients (n=182)
w ith a known presence of fluid in
the subhumeral and subdeltoid bur­
sae and in patients w ith reduced functional capacity.25 Ultrasound
was used both as a diagnostic tool
and to monitor the effectiveness of
the exercise program targeting
reduction of subluxation and bursal
fluid. Similarly, another study inves­
tigated the association betw een GHS
and soft tissue injuries in 39 people
w ith stroke.26 Similar to our study,
the diagnosis of GHS was done by
measuring the lateral AGT distance.
The study showed that ultrasound
complements the assessment of soft
tissue injuries in shoulders of people
w ith stroke.26
Given these findings, ultrasound has
potential usefulness in both research
and clinical practice. Clinically, ultra­
sound may be used to assess and
m onitor the effectiveness of treat­ment interventions for GHS in peo­
ple w ith severe paralysis, especially
during the early stage of rehabilita­
tion. It also has potential to diagnose
soft tissue injuries in people with
stroke, both w ith and w ithout GHS,
and thus can facilitate management
of shoulder pain. In particular, it has
utility as an outcom e measure in
intervention studies. The ultrasound
m ethod is objective, quantitative,
and has the potential to detect even
small changes in AGT distance
measurements.
The current study had some limita­
tions. First, there was a difference in
the patients’ starting position for the
2 methods. For the fingerbreadth pal­
pation method, patients w ere in an
upright sitting position with their arms hanging freely by their sides
and without arm support. In con­
trast, for the ultrasound method, the
patients’ forearm was placed in their
lap. Patients with loss of motor con­
trol are potentially at risk of develop­
ing GHS, and gravity-dependent posi­
tions of the shoulder, therefore,
should be avoided.3 Kumar et al28
developed a new standardized posi­
tion with the forearm supported on a
pillow, but the elbow itself remained
unsupported to allow the effect of
gravity. The study demonstrated
excellent intrarater reliability and
discriminant validity for the ultra­
sound method, suggesting it has the
ability to diagnose GHS even when
the forearm is supported. It was not
possible to use this newly developed
position for the fingerbreadth palpa­
tion method because there are no
reports on reliability and validity for
this method in this position. Second,
patients were recruited from multi­
ple sites, which meant 7 different
physical therapists were involved in
the assessment of GHS using the fin­
gerbreadth palpation method. The
reported interrater reliability (ICC)
for the fingerbreadth palpation
method is between .770 and .792.12
This reliability might have contrib­
uted to greater variability and might
have had some effect on the cor­
relation between fingerbreadth pal­
pation and ultrasound methods.
Finally, the assessors conducting the
fingerbreadth palpation method also
were the clinical therapists involved
in the routine care of study patients
at the hospital. It is likely, therefore,
that they were aware of the patients’
subluxation status, which might
have influenced their judgment on
the day of data collection. However,
patients (n=35) at the day center
were not known to the clinical
therapists. In conclusion, on the basis of the
AUROC curve value of 0.73, this
study demonstrated a good level of
agreement between the ultrasound and fingerbreadth palpation meth­
ods. The ROC curve findings from
this study indicate that a cutoff point
of >0.2 cm could be used to deter­
mine the sensitivity and specificity of
the ultrasound method to identify
asymmetry between affected and
unaffected shoulders and facilitate
diagnosis of GHS. The ultrasound
method has the potential advantage
over the fingerbreadth palpation
method of identifying patients with
even minor subluxation (SO.5 cm).
Ultrasound measurements provide
ratio-level data and have clinical util­
ity as an outcome measure in inter­
vention studies. Future studies
should investigate the diagnostic
accuracy of the ultrasound method
in the assessment of GHS in compar­
ison with radiographic measure­
ments. From an ethical perspective,
investigation of diagnostic accuracy
of the ultrasound method could be
incorporated into intervention stud­
ies that routinely use radiographs to
evaluate outcomes.
