Association between Multidisciplinary Care and Survival for Elderly Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease

Brenda R. Hemmelgarn,*[†] Braden J. Manns,*[‡] Jianguo Zhang,* Marcello Tonelli,†§ Scott Klarenbach,†§ Michael Walsh,* and Bruce F. Culleton;* for the Alberta Kidney Disease Network

Departments of *Medicine and *Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, and *Institute of Health Economics and *Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada*

The effectiveness of multidisciplinary care (MDC) in improving health outcomes for patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) is uncertain. This study sought to determine the association among MDC, survival, and risk for hospitalization among elderly outpatients with CKD. A total of 6978 patients who were 66 yr and older and had CKD were identified between July 1 and December 31, 2001, and followed to December 31, 2004; 187 (2.7%) were followed in an MDC clinic. Logistic regression was used to determine the propensity score (probability of MDC) for each patient, and MDC and non-MDC patients then were matched 1:1 on the basis of their score. A Cox model was used to determine the association between MDC and risk for death and hospitalization. After adjustment for age, gender, baseline GFR, diabetes, and comorbidity score, there was a 50% reduction in the risk for death for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group (hazard ratio [HR] 0.50; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.35 to 0.71). There was no difference in the risk for all-cause (HR 0.83; 95% CI 0.64 to 1.06) or cardiovascular-specific hospitalization (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.54 to 1.06) for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group. In conclusion, it was found that MDC was associated with a significant reduction in the risk for all-cause mortality and, although not statistically significant, a trend toward a reduction in risk for all-cause and cardiovascular-specific hospitalizations. The benefits of MDC and an assessment of their economic impact should be tested in a randomized, controlled trial.


Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common and is associated with a poor prognosis, including the development of premature cardiovascular disease and increased mortality (1–5). Given the multiple comorbidities and complexity of care for patients with CKD, it has been proposed that multidisciplinary care (MDC) that is delivered by an interdisciplinary health care team may improve health outcomes in this patient population (6–8).

MDC clinics are being used by the majority of nephrology programs in North America (9), even though their effectiveness in improving morbidity and mortality outcomes for patients with CKD largely is unknown. Although observational studies suggested a survival advantage with MDC (10,11), these studies were limited to patients who initiated dialysis, thereby introducing a potential survival bias. An earlier randomized trial of patients with CKD found no effect of MDC compared with usual care on decline in kidney function, health care utilization, or mortality (12). A more recent randomized trial suggested that MDC was not associated with improvement in vascular structure or function in patients with stages 4 and 5 CKD (13), although a psychoeducational intervention alone did demonstrate an extension in time to initiation of renal replacement therapy and improved survival (14,15). However, these trials have limitations, including reliance on primary care physicians to implement recommendations (12), inclusion of patients who already are on dialysis (13), and an educational intervention administered without MDC as it currently exists (14,15). In contrast, randomized trials of MDC in other chronic disease conditions have been shown to result in improved morbidity and mortality (16–20). Given the uncertainty with respect to the effectiveness and the resource intensity that is associated with MDC, we sought to determine the association among MDC, survival, and risk for hospitalization among elderly outpatients with CKD, compared with usual care.

Materials and Methods
Data Sources and Identification of Study Population

We identified a cohort of elderly patients with CKD from the Calgary Laboratory Services computerized database (Calgary, AL, Canada). Calgary Laboratory Services provides laboratory testing to the entire Calgary Health Region (catchment population 1.1 million) using a single regional laboratory and standardized methods. To be eligible for inclusion, patients had to be 66 yr or older and have had at least one outpatient serum creatinine measurement during a 6-mp period (July 1, 2001, to December 31, 2001). Laboratory measurements that were associated with a hospital admission were excluded to avoid episodes of acute renal failure. The first outpatient serum creatinine measurement during this period was used to define the index GFR.

The cohort was linked to the Southern Alberta Renal Program computerized database, and all patients followed in the MDC clinic during the 18-mo period from July 1, 2001, to December 31, 2002, were identified (both incident and prevalent MDC patients). The Southern Alberta Renal Program provides care to all patients with ESRD in southern Alberta (including the Calgary Health Region) and maintains a computerized database of all dialysis patients, kidney transplant patients, and patients who have CKD and are followed in the MDC clinic (21). Renal transplant recipients and patients who already were receiving dialysis at study entry were excluded.

The cohort also was linked to provincial administrative data (as described previously) (22,23) to obtain information on prescription drug use in the year before their index GFR. Briefly, all residents of Alberta who are 65 yr and older receive insured health services, including coverage for prescription drugs. For ensuring availability of 1 yr of drug data for all patients, entry into the study was limited to patients who were 66 yr and older. In addition to determining exposure to specific classes of medications (including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, β blockers, diuretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and cholesterol-lowering drugs), drug data were used to determine the presence of diabetes, as defined by at least one prescription for insulin or an oral hypoglycemic agent in the year before the index GFR, and to derive a measure of comorbidity (24).

Assessment of Kidney Function

An estimate of GFR was obtained from the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation, using variables for age, gender, and serum creatinine (25). Preliminary studies have validated this equation in the elderly population (26). Although data on race were not available from the data sources, fewer than 1% of the Alberta population is black (27): therefore, the impact at the population level of eliminating race from the estimate of GFR was expected to be minimal. We limited our study population to individuals with stage 3 or greater CKD (index GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m²).

Multidisciplinary Care Clinics

Patients are referred to the MDC clinic by their primary nephrologist. At the first MDC visit, an education session is held with the patient and his or her family members and is attended by a specialized clinic nurse, registered dieician, and social worker. Patient education includes a discussion of CKD and its progression and complications, fluid and dietary restrictions, monitoring BP, effects of medications, and recommendations regarding exercise and diet. Patients also are provided with a booklet produced by the Kidney Foundation (“Living with Kidney Disease,” available at http://www.kidney.ca/files/Kidney/ aCompletcManual.pdf). MDC patients undergo blood work every 1 to 3 mo to monitor kidney function and metabolic complications and are seen by their primary nephrologist every 3 to 6 mo. Management in the MDC clinic is focused on medical management and lifestyle modification to delay progression of CKD and target cardiovascular risk factor reduction.

Study Outcome

All-cause mortality, obtained from the Alberta Bureau of Vital Statistics, was the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes included hospitalization (all-cause) and hospitalization for cardiovascular causes (composite of acute myocardial infarction [AMI], congestive heart failure [CHF], cerebrovascular accident [CVA], or transient ischemic attack [TIA], as determined from the Calgary Health Region corporate database. For patients with multiple hospitalizations, only the first hospitalization during the study period was included. Cause-specific hospitalizations were based on the following validated codes from the International Classification of Diseases Ninth and Tenth Revisions, using the primary discharge diagnosis: AMI (28,29) 410, 411.1, I21, or I22; CHF (30,31) 428 or I50; and CVA/TIA (32) 362.3, 433.x1, 434.x1, 436, 431.x, 430.x, 435.x, H34.1, I63.x, I64.x, I61.x, I60.x, or G45.x.

Statistical Analyses

Characteristics for MDC and non-MDC patients (the remaining patients in the cohort) were compared with χ² tests for categorical variables, t test for age, and rank-sum test for the comorbidity score. For the survival analysis, all patients were followed from the date of their index GFR until death or the end of the study (December 31, 2004). Because MDC and non-MDC patients may have different characteristics, we used a propensity score analysis (33) to adjust for differences in the likelihood of being followed in an MDC clinic between the two groups. A propensity score analysis is a method of controlling for confounding in observational studies.

The first step in the propensity score analyses was to calculate an individual’s propensity score, which is defined as his or her conditional probability of assignment to the MDC group, given the observed confounders. To obtain this propensity score, we used logistic regression to model the likelihood of MDC as the dependent variable, with independent variables including age, gender, index GFR, diabetes, comorbidity score, and medication use including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blockers, β blockers, calcium channel blockers, antiarrhythmics, diuretics, cholesterol-lowering agents, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The predicted probability of the dependent variable (likelihood of MDC) from this model represents the propensity score for each individual and provides an estimate of the probability that an individual was followed at the MDC clinic. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was calculated to assess the predictive ability of the propensity score model.

MDC and non-MDC patients then were matched using Greedy matching algorithms, on the basis of their propensity score, at a ratio of 1:1. Matching on the propensity score allowed comparison of survival and hospitalization outcomes for individuals with a similar likelihood of being referred and followed in an MDC clinic. One-to-one matching was chosen on the basis of assessment of model fit and a more balanced distribution of patient characteristics and propensity scores after matching. Survival at up to 3.5 yr was calculated for the MDC and non-MDC groups. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were plotted for the two groups, with differences in survival compared using the log rank test.

The association between MDC and survival was characterized further using Cox models and shared frailty modeling techniques, which take into account the matching of patients (34). Covariates that were considered in the model included age, gender, diabetes, baseline GFR, and comorbidity score. We also conducted two sensitivity analyses for the mortality outcome: (1) On a subgroup of patients for whom we had a measure of serum hemoglobin and albumin, to assess their potential confounding effect, and (2) on a subgroup of patients who were in the MDC clinic between July 1, 2001, and December 31, 2001 (the same period that was used to define the non-MDC group), to assess the potential for a survivor bias.

This analysis was repeated using time to all-cause hospitalization, as well as time to hospitalization for a cardiovascular cause, as the outcome. All analyses were conducted using SAS (version 9.1; SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and STATA (version 9.0; STATA Corp., College Station, TX). The conjoint ethics review board at the University of Calgary approved the study.

Results
A total of 6978 patients with CKD were included in the study, 187 (2.7%) of whom were followed in the MDC clinic. Baseline patient characteristics, by MDC status, are shown in Table 1. Compared with non-MDC patients, patients in the MDC clinic were younger and more likely to be male, have a lower GFR, and have increased comorbidity. During the study period, 61 (32.6%) patients in the MDC group died, compared with 1874 (27.6%) in the non-MDC group (P = 0.13). Patients in the MDC group also were more likely to initiate dialysis during the study period (43.4 versus 1.5%; P < 0.0001).

Propensity Score Analysis
The logistic regression model to derive the propensity score, using likelihood of being followed in the MDC clinic as the outcome, had an area under the ROC curve of 0.93, denoting excellent predictive discrimination with respect to the outcome (a value of 1.0 indicates perfect predictive discrimination, whereas a value of 0.5 indicates no ability to discriminate with respect to the outcome). Each MDC patient then was matched at a ratio of 1:1 to a non-MDC patient, on the basis of their propensity score. Baseline characteristics of the MDC and non-MDC group were similar after matching (Table 2). All remaining analyses are based on the 187 MDC patients and the matched 187 non-MDC patients.

All-Cause Mortality
Of the 374 patients in the matched analyses, 61 (32.6%) in the MDC and 77 (41.2%) in the non-MDC group died during the study period. As shown in Figure 1, Kaplan-Meier survival estimates demonstrated a significant increased likelihood of survival for MDC compared with non-MDC patients (log rank test P = 0.01). After adjustment for age, gender, baseline GFR, diabetes, and comorbidity score, the risk for death was reduced by 50% for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group (HR 0.50; 95% CI 0.35 to 0.71). The survival benefit was evident early (within 1 yr) and persisted beyond 1 yr of follow-up.

Hospitalization
There was no difference in the risk for all-cause hospitalization (HR 0.83; 95% CI 0.64 to 1.06) or hospitalization for cardiovascular causes (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.54 to 1.06) for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group.

Sensitivity Analyses
The results of the sensitivity analyses were consistent with the primary analysis. The HR for death for the MDC compared with the non-MDC group was 0.50 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.72) after adjustment for hemoglobin and albumin (n = 248) and 0.60 (95% CI 0.34 to 1.05) for the subgroup of patients who were in the MDC clinic between July 1, 2001, and December 31, 2001 (n = 84).

Discussion
We found that MDC was associated with a significant reduction in the risk for all-cause mortality among elderly patients with CKD, compared with usual care. Although not statistically significant, there was a trend toward a reduction in the risk for all-cause and cardiovascular-specific hospitalizations. The survival benefit was evident early (within 1 yr) and persisted beyond 1 yr of follow-up. These findings are consistent with previous observational studies that suggested a survival advantage with MDC (10,11,35–37), although our study extends these findings to patients who are not yet on dialysis.

The survival benefit associated with MDC may be explained by several factors. First, MDC clinics provide a structured approach to care, including education, lifestyle modification, and medical management, which may delay progression of CKD and reduce cardiovascular risk factors (38). Second, patients in the MDC clinic were more likely to receive evidence-based medications, including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and statins, compared with non-MDC patients (Table 1). Although we adjusted for medication use in the propensity score, residual confounding may remain. Third, patients in the MDC clinic had more frequent monitoring of kidney function and metabolic complications, which may have led to earlier detection and treatment of complications. Finally, the psychoeducational component of the MDC clinic may have improved patient adherence to medications and lifestyle recommendations, although this was not directly measured in our study.

Our findings are in contrast to those of previous randomized trials that found no effect of MDC on mortality or hospitalization (12,13). However, these trials had several limitations, including reliance on primary care physicians to implement recommendations (12), inclusion of patients who already were on dialysis (13), and an educational intervention administered without MDC as it currently exists (14,15). In contrast, our study evaluated the effectiveness of MDC as it is currently practiced in a real-world setting, with patients who were not yet on dialysis.

The issue of how to provide optimal care to patients with CKD is central to nephrology. This article provides data to suggest that multidisciplinary care dramatically reduces mortality in these patients. This reality is reinforced in the accompanying issue of CJASN by data presented by Patwardhan et al. (pages 277–283) that confirm the additional benefit of having a nephrologist involved in the care of CKD patients relatively early in the course. A CJASN editorial by Blantz (pages 193–195) provides excellent perspective on the increasing evidence that supports the long-term benefits of closer cooperation between nephrologists and non-nephrologists versus the short-term increased costs of this model.