Axillary dissection versus no axillary dissection in patients with sentinel-node micrometastases (IBCSG 23–01): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial
Author links open overlay panel
Dr Viviana Galimberti MD a
Bernard F Cole PhD i j
Stefano Zurrida MD b
Giuseppe Viale MD e k
Alberto Luini MD c
Paolo Veronesi MD d k
Paola Baratella MD c
Camelia Chifu MD c
Manuela Sargenti MD c
Mattia Intra MD c
Oreste Gentilini MD c, 
Mauro G Mastropasqua MD e
Giovanni Mazzarol MD e
Samuele Massarut MD l
Jean-Rémi Garbay MD m
Janez Zgajnar MD n
Hanne Galatius MD o
Angelo Recalcati MD p
David Littlejohn FRACS q, 
Monika Bamert MD r
Marco Colleoni MD f
Karen N Price BS j s
Meredith M Regan SD j t
Aron Goldhirsch MD g
Alan S Coates MD u
Richard D Gelber PhD j s t v
Umberto Veronesi MD h
for the International Breast Cancer Study Group Trial 23–01 investigators

Summary

Background
For patients with breast cancer and metastases in the sentinel nodes, axillary dissection has been standard treatment. However, for patients with limited sentinel-node involvement, axillary dissection might be overtreatment. We designed IBCSG trial 23–01 to determine whether no axillary dissection was non-inferior to axillary dissection in patients with one or more micrometastatic (≤2 mm) sentinel nodes and tumour of maximum 5 cm.

Methods
In this multicentre, randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial, patients were eligible if they had clinically non-palpable axillary lymph node(s) and a primary tumour of 5 cm or less and who, after sentinel-node biopsy, had one or more micrometastatic (≤2 mm) sentinel lymph nodes with no extracapsular extension. Patients were randomly assigned (in a 1:1 ratio) to either undergo axillary dissection or not to undergo axillary dissection. Randomisation was stratified by centre and menopausal status. Treatment assignment was not masked. The primary endpoint was disease-free survival. Non-inferiority was defined as a hazard ratio (HR) of less than 1·25 for no axillary dissection versus axillary dissection. The analysis was by intention to treat. Per protocol, disease and survival information continues to be collected yearly. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00072293.

Findings
Between April 1, 2001, and Feb 28, 2010, 465 patients were randomly assigned to axillary dissection and 469 to no axillary dissection. After the exclusion of three patients, 464 patients were in the axillary dissection group and 467 patients were in the no axillary dissection group. After a median follow-up of 5·0 (IQR 3·6–7·3) years, we recorded 69 disease-free survival events in the axillary dissection group and 55 events in the no axillary dissection group. Breast-cancer-related events were recorded in 48 patients in the axillary dissection group and 47 in the no axillary dissection group (ten local recurrences in the axillary dissection group and eight in the no axillary dissection group; three and nine contralateral breast cancers; one and five regional recurrences; and 34 and 25 distant relapses). Other non-breast cancer events were recorded in 21 patients in the axillary dissection group and eight in the no axillary dissection group (20 and six second non-breast malignancies; and one and two deaths not due to a cancer event). 5-year disease-free survival was 87·8% (95% CI 84·4–91·2) in the group without axillary dissection and 84·4% (80·7–88·1) in the group with axillary dissection (log-rank p=0·16; HR for no axillary dissection vs axillary dissection was 0·78, 95% CI 0·55–1·11, non-inferiority p=0·0042). Patients with reported long-term surgical events (grade 3–4) included one sensory neuropathy (grade 3), three lymphoedema (two grade 3 and one grade 4), and three motor neuropathy (grade 3), all in the group that underwent axillary dissection, and one grade 3 motor neuropathy in the group without axillary dissection. One serious adverse event was reported, a postoperative infection in the axilla in the group with axillary dissection.

Interpretation
Axillary dissection could be avoided in patients with early breast cancer and limited sentinel-node involvement, thus eliminating complications of axillary surgery with no adverse effect on survival.


Introduction
The first randomised trial to validate sentinel-node biopsy in breast cancer was published in 2003.1 That trial and others confirmed that sentinel-node biopsy accurately staged the axilla, so that if the sentinel node is not involved, the other axillary nodes are most probably disease-free and the patient can be spared axillary dissection.2, 3, 4 If the sentinel node was involved, standard practice was axillary dissection (Berg levels I and II in the USA,5, 6 and all three Berg levels in many European countries4). Axillary dissection removes any disease within the axilla, after which disease recurrence in the axilla is rare.7, 8, 9, 10 It might also have a favourable effect on survival, although this effect has never been proven since its main use was as a disease staging procedure.4, 11, 12 However, short-term and long-term side-effects of axillary dissection have always been a concern. These side-effects include lymphoedema, pain, and reduced arm movement.13, 14
Sentinel-node biopsy very quickly became an integral part of the conservative treatment of breast cancer because it allowed avoidance of axillary dissection in a large proportion of patients with early breast cancer, while still providing information to guide adjuvant treatment. However, with the development of sentinel-node biopsy came new and more exhaustive methods of assessing the sentinel node to ensure that no disease in that location was missed. Before the era of sentinel-node biopsy, about three sections per axillary lymph node were typically examined; subsequently, the entire sentinel node was serial sectioned and all sections examined.15 This assessment resulted in the frequent identification of micrometastatic foci (≤2 mm in diameter) and isolated tumour cells, whose prognostic significance was unknown.
We designed the International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) 23–01 multicentre randomised controlled trial to identify whether axillary dissection might be overtreatment in patients who have micrometastases only in the sentinel node. Specifically, we designed the trial to compare outcomes in patients with sentinel-node micrometastases treated with axillary dissection with outcomes in those receiving no further treatment to the axilla.

Methods

Study design and patients
IBCSG 23–01 was a two-group, multicentre, randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial comparing no axillary dissection with axillary dissection in patients with breast cancer and micrometastases in the sentinel node. Patients were recruited from 27 institutions between April 1, 2001, and Feb 8, 2010.
We registered eligible patients for the trial before surgery after they had given written informed consent. Women eligible for registration could be any age with clinical, mammographic, ultrasonographic, or pathological diagnosis of breast cancer, provided they had no previous or concomitant malignancy, pure ductal carcinoma in situ, previous systemic therapy for breast cancer, cancer chemoprevention treatment in the preceding year, distant metastases, palpable axillary nodes, or Paget's disease without invasive cancer. Pregnant or lactating women were also ineligible. On the basis of the 2005 American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) guidelines5 and to increase accrual, the criteria for eligibility were broadened in June, 2006, to include patients with one or more positive sentinel nodes (formerly only one); multicentric or multifocal tumours (formerly only unicentric); and largest lesion size of 5 cm or smaller (formerly ≤3 cm).
Patients could be scheduled for mastectomy or conservative breast surgery. They were included in the trial and randomly assigned to treatment if, during or after surgical treatment for breast cancer, they were found to have a tumour of a maximum diameter of 5 cm or less by pathological measurement of the surgical specimen, and one or more micrometastatic foci (≤2 mm) in the sentinel nodes, but no macrometastatic disease. We included isolated tumour cells16, 17 within the definition of micrometastatic.
The independent data and safety monitoring committee reviewed accrual, safety, and number of events every 6 months. The protocol was approved by the institutional review boards of all participating centres, and all participants provided written informed consent. Data were obtained at the participating centres and transmitted to the IBCSG data management centre in Amherst, New York, USA, via the DataFax or iDataFax system.

Randomisation and masking
Patients were randomly allocated (in a 1:1 ratio) to either axillary dissection or no axillary dissection. Randomisation was done with permuted blocks generated by a congruence algorithm. Randomisation was stratified by participating centre and menopausal status. After confirming eligibility, participating centre staff accessed the central randomisation system via the internet and entered required information including stratification factors. The randomisation system assigned a patient identification number, treatment group, and date of randomisation via the computer screen with a follow-up email. The IBCSG data management centre developed and maintains the randomisation system. Masking was not done in this surgical trial. The patient, participating centre staff, trial management staff, and others were aware of the assigned treatment.

Procedures
The sentinel node could be examined in one of three ways: (1) preoperatively under local anaesthesia—if the patient had a micrometastatic node and was randomly assigned to the axillary dissection group, she underwent axillary dissection during the operation to remove the primary; (2) intra-operatively, with intra-operative sentinel-node examination, and axillary dissection done during the operation to remove the primary; (3) intra-operatively with later histological examination, and later second surgery under general anaesthesia if randomly assigned to undergo axillary dissection. All sentinel nodes were entirely sectioned at 50–200 μm intervals and all sections (frozen or permanent) were examined with haematoxylin and eosin staining by pathologists at each participating centre. Cytokeratin immunostaining was used only when the presence of micrometastases was suspected, but not certain, or not determined, on haematoxylin and eosin-stained sections. The treating physician assessed and reported long-term surgical events (sensory neuropathy, lymphoedema, and motor neuropathy) at every follow-up visit (every 4 months from the date of randomisation for the first year, and every 6 months for years 2–5) on the basis of the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria version 2. Serious adverse events were recorded as they occurred.

Statistical analysis
The primary endpoint was disease-free survival, determined as the number of years from randomisation until first evidence of invasive relapse at any site, second primary tumour (contralateral or non-breast), or death. Secondary endpoints were overall survival, site of recurrence (we were particularly interested in axillary recurrences), and surgical complications of axillary dissection. We calculated overall survival as the number of years from randomisation to death from any cause.
As originally designed, target accrual was 1960 patients with analysis planned after 558 events. These targets were based on having 90% power to detect non-inferiority of no axillary dissection with a one-sided statistical significance level of 10% (ie, α=0·10) under the assumption that 5-year disease-free survival with axillary dissection was 70% and defining non-inferiority as a hazard ratio (HR) of less than 1·25 (no axillary dissection relative to axillary dissection).
Accrual started on April 1, 2001, and closed on Feb 28, 2010, after 934 patients had been randomised. The primary reasons for early closure were that the projected time to complete accrual was too long and the event rate was lower than expected. Following the recommendation of the independent data and safety monitoring committee, we decided to continue follow-up of patients and do the primary analysis after a median follow-up of 60 months, when at least 100 events were expected to have occurred. We made this decision without any knowledge of endpoint treatment comparisons. We did no interim analyses, thus the full statistical significance level of 10% was expended in the present analysis, which represents the final analysis in terms of type I error-spending.
We compared the numbers of long-term surgical effects across the treatment groups using Fisher's exact test after excluding patients who did not receive the treatment allocated by randomisation.
We assessed disease-free survival and overall survival using the Kaplan-Meier product-limit method. We used the log-rank test, stratified by menopausal status, to compare the treatment groups. We converted the log-rank test statistic (O – E, observed minus expected numbers of events) and its variance (V) into an HR comparing no axillary dissection versus axillary dissection using the formula HR = exp([O – E] / V).18 We estimated CIs and p values for HRs on the basis of a normal distribution following natural logarithm transformation. We did the one-sided test of non-inferiority of no axillary dissection comparing the observed HR with 1·25 (ie, null hypothesis HR ≥1·25). We assessed and compared the cumulative incidence of breast cancer events, defined as invasive relapse at any site or contralateral breast cancer, using the Gray method,19 treating second primaries and other-cause deaths as competing risks.
We did the predefined primary analysis on the intention-to-treat population, defined as all eligible, randomised patients, regardless of what treatment they actually received. A secondary, per-protocol analysis excluded patients who did not receive the treatment allocated by randomisation.
We did multivariable analyses on disease-free survival in the intention-to-treat population using the proportional hazards regression model, stratified by menopausal status. We first evaluated each predictor in a univariate analysis. We then entered significant (two-sided p<0·05) predictors, together with treatment group, in the multivariable regression model. We subsequently re-assessed the remaining variables for inclusion in the multivariable model. We assessed the interaction between treatment group and each predictor by including the appropriate product term in the multivariable regression model.
All HRs, except the analysis of overall survival, were assessed with 95% CIs, or 99% CIs for subgroup analyses. For the analysis of overall survival, we used a 90% CI for comparison with the ACOSOG Z001113 trial. The statistical analysis was done with SAS Version 9.2 and R Version 2.15.1. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00072293.

Role of the funding source
The International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) sponsored the trial. There was no pharmaceutical support or specific funding source related to the trial. The IBCSG was solely responsible for the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

Results
6681 patients were registered for the trial before surgery between April 1, 2001, and Feb 28, 2010 (figure 1). Of these, 934 (14%) patients from 27 clinical centres in Europe, South America, and Australia were included in the randomisation, of which 583 (62%) were from the European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

Three randomised patients were excluded from the analysis (two had no data submitted because no tumour was found in a sentinel node, and one withdrew consent for treatment and follow-up shortly after randomisation). After exclusion of these three patients, 931 patients (464 in the group with axillary dissection and 467 in the group without axillary dissection) were available for analysis as the intention-to-treat population (figure 1). Follow-up compliance was good and similar in the two treatment groups; of 807 patients remaining disease-free, only nine (2·3%) of 395 in the axillary dissection group and seven (1·7%) of 412 in the no axillary dissection group had most recent follow-up before 2010. In the group allocated to axillary dissection, 17 patients did not receive axillary dissection, and in the group allocated to not receive axillary dissection, 14 patients received axillary dissection. The per-protocol population excluded these 31 patients.
Patient and tumour characteristics were well balanced between the treatment groups (table 1). Median patient age was 54 years (range 26–81). 520 (56%) of the 931 evaluable patients were postmenopausal. 638 (69%) patients had tumours <2 cm, 63 (7%) had tumours ≥3 cm, and 264 (28%) had grade III disease. Tumours were oestrogen-receptor positive in 834 (90%) patients, and progesterone-receptor positive in 702 (75%) patients. 643 (69%) patients had sentinel-node micrometastasis ≤1·0 mm, 266 (29%) had micrometastasis 1·1–2·0 mm, and 21 (2%) had metastasis >2·0 mm. 899 (97%) patients underwent lymphoscintigraphy, and one or two sentinel nodes were found in 767 (82%) of patients. Excision biopsy was performed in 117 (13%) patients. The median number of axillary nodes removed in the axillary dissection group was 21·0. Additional involved axillary nodes were found in 13% of patients in the axillary dissection group. Among the 447 patients in the axillary dissection group who received axillary dissection, 59 (13%) had at least one additional axillary node involved; 37 (8%) had one, 13 (3%) had two, and nine (2%) had three or more involved. Breast-conserving surgery was definitive treatment in 91% of patients in both treatment groups (420 in the axillary dissection group and 425 in the no axillary dissection group). The remaining patients underwent mastectomy. 823 (97%) of the 845 patients who received breast-conserving surgery were given adjuvant radiotherapy. Patients either received conventional postoperative radiotherapy alone, in combination with intra-operative treatment or intra-operative treatment alone. Adjuvant radiotherapy consisted of one-shot intra-operative treatment with electrons (ELIOT,20 alone or in combination with postoperative radiotherapy) in 230 (27%) of patients who received breast-conserving surgery. Hormonal therapy alone was given to 607 (65%) patients, chemotherapy alone was given to 75 (8%) patients, and combinations of hormonal therapy and chemotherapy were given to 210 (23%) patients (table 1).

Distant metastasis was the first event in 59 patients (34 in the group with axillary dissection, and 25 in the group without axillary dissection). Locoregional recurrence was the first event in 24 patients (11 in the group with axillary dissection, 13 in the group without axillary dissection). Regional recurrences occurred in one patient in the group with axillary dissection and in five patients in the group without axillary dissection; the recurrence in the group with axillary dissection involved the axilla and four recurrences involved the axilla in the group without axillary dissection. All six patients with a regional recurrence received breast-conserving surgery. Four of these patients received radiotherapy (the patient in the axillary dissection group received postoperative radiotherapy only, two in the group without axillary dissection group received intra-operative radiotherapy only, and one in the group without axillary dissection received both intra-operative and postoperative radiotherapy).
5-year disease-free survival was 84·4% (95% CI 80·7–88·1) in the group with axillary dissection and 87·8% (84·4–91·2) in the group without axillary dissection (log-rank p=0·16; figure 2A). Disease-free survival in the group without axillary dissection was non-inferior to the axillary dissection group (HR 0·78, 95% CI 0·55–1·11; non-inferiority p=0·0042). Results for the per-protocol population were similar (disease-free survival HR 0·80, 0·56–1·14; non-inferiority p=0·0073).

The 5-year cumulative incidence of breast cancer events was 10·8% (95% CI 7·6–14·0) in the group with axillary dissection and 10·6% (7·5–13·8) in the group without axillary dissection group (HR 0·97, 95% CI 0·65–1·46, p=0·90; figure 2B). 5-year overall survival was 97·6% (95% CI 96·0–99·2) in the group with axillary dissection and 97·5% (95·8–99·1) in the group without axillary dissection (HR 0·89, 90% CI 0·52–1·54; log-rank p=0·73; figure 2C).
We did a subgroup analysis on subgroups defined by tumour size, oestrogen-receptor status, progesterone-receptor status, tumour grade, and type of surgery (figure 3). In all subgroups the observed HR was lower than 1·25, and the group without axillary dissection was significantly (ie, p<0·10) non-inferior to the group without axillary dissection in the following subgroups: tumour size smaller than 2 cm (non-inferiority p=0·017), tumour size of 2·0–2·9 cm (p=0·053), oestrogen-receptor positive (p=0·0034), progesterone-receptor positive (p=0·0023), grade I tumour (p=0·0031), grade III tumour (p=0·042), and breast-conserving surgery (p=0·012).

Figure 3. Analysis of subgroups defined by tumour size, oestrogen-receptor status, progesterone-receptor status, tumour grade, and type of surgery, by intention to treat (n=931)

HRs compare no axillary dissection versus axillary dissection among subgroups of the intention-to-treat population. Each subgroup HR is shown as a black square with the size of the square being inversely proportional to the variance of the corresponding log-HR estimate (ie, larger squares indicate lower variability in the estimate). The HR for all patients is shown as a diamond. The horizontal axis is displayed on a logarithmic scale.
Table 4 shows the multivariable proportional hazards regression analysis for disease-free survival. All variables in table 1 were assessed for predictive ability, but only those predictors that were significant in univariate analysis (two-sided p<0·05; data not shown) were included in the multivariable model. The regression estimates shown in table 4 were based on the 913 patients without missing data regarding tumour size, hormone-receptor status, or tumour grade. Tumour size and tumour grade were significant predictors of disease-free survival, whereas axillary dissection versus no axillary dissection had no significant effect on disease-free survival. Oestrogen-receptor status and progesterone-receptor status, although significant in the univariate analysis, were not significant predictors in the multivariable analysis. Removal of these variables from the model had a negligible effect on the treatment-comparison HR (disease-free survival HR 0·75, 95% CI 0·53–1·07, p=0·11). Nodal characteristics, including the number of sentinel nodes removed, were not significant predictors. No significant interactions were noted between treatment group and any of the other predictors (data not shown); thus, we detected no evidence of heterogeneity of HRs across the subgroups defined by the prognostic factors.

Overall survival did not differ between the two groups either. Furthermore, the rate of disease recurrence was reassuringly low in the undissected axilla (<1%), which was not unexpected in view of similar findings in other studies.1, 21 However, non-sentinel axillary nodes were metastatic in 13% of the axillary dissection group. The discrepancy between the low rate of axillary recurrence in the group without axillary dissection and the high rate of axillary involvement in the axillary dissection group might be due to systemic treatment and whole breast irradiation, both of which can eliminate low volume axillary metastasis.4 In fact, 927 of our patients (>99%) received radiotherapy or systemic treatment, or both. Note, however, that 92 (22%) of the patients in the group without axillary dissection who had breast-conserving surgery received either no radiation therapy (12 patients; 3%) or received ELIOT (partial breast irradiation) alone (80 patients; 19%), which cannot sterilise any residual axillary disease. It is also possible that intact axillary lymph nodes can eliminate low volume disease by immunosurveillance mechanisms.4
Our findings are consistent with those of the ACOSOG Z0011 trial,13, 21, 22 which recruited 856 patients with limited macrometastatic sentinel-node involvement (not more than two metastatic sentinel nodes) undergoing conservative surgery only, and randomly assigned them to axillary dissection versus no further axillary treatment. After a median follow-up of 6·3 years, the groups did not differ for any endpoint. The authors concluded that for patients with limited sentinel-node involvement, no axillary dissection is justified, provided that patients receive both traditional whole breast radiation and systemic adjuvant treatment. Results from ACOSOG Z0011 and IBCSG 23–01 are shown side by side in the appendix.
Unlike ACOSOG Z0011, 9% of the patients in our trial received mastectomy. Although numbers are small, subgroup analysis suggested that no axillary dissection might be acceptable for patients undergoing mastectomy (figure 3) provided the invasive component of the breast lesion is small.
Axillary dissection has traditionally been a guide to adjuvant treatment rather than a treatment itself. However, in our study, the two groups did not differ in terms of proportions receiving any type of adjuvant therapy, indicating that detailed axillary node involvement—identified in the group with axillary dissection—had no influence on adjuvant treatment. Results from the AMAROS study,23, 24 which compared axillary dissection with axillary radiotherapy in patients with early breast cancer and a positive sentinel node also showed that axillary dissection had no influence on the administration of adjuvant treatment in the first 566 patients assessed. Thus the information provided by axillary dissection is no longer useful.
Other reasons exist for wanting to spare women axillary dissection when the sentinel node is positive: generally, about half of such patients have no other axillary involvement (87% of our patients in the axillary dissection group) and axillary dissection is overtreatment for them. Furthermore, biological characteristics of the primary tumour, such as hormone receptor expression,25, 26 HER2 status,27, 28 and tumour proliferation rate (eg, Ki67 labelling index),27, 28 substitute the prognostic information formerly provided by axillary status.
In conclusion, it is possible that our trial and ACOSOG Z0011 will change clinical practice, sparing many patients with early breast-cancer axillary dissection, especially when the sentinel node is minimally involved, thus reducing surgical complications related to axillary dissection with no adverse effect on survival. In fact, the 2011 St Gallen Consensus Conference29 has already moved in that direction recommending that micrometastases in a single sentinel node should not be an indication for axillary dissection irrespective of the type of breast surgery given.
