Timing of Endoscopy for Acute Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Authors: James Y.W. Lau, M.D. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0122-4068, Yuanyuan Yu, Ph.D., Raymond S.Y. Tang, M.D., Heyson C.H. Chan, M.B., Ch.B., Hon-Chi Yip, M.B., Ch.B., Shannon M. Chan, M.B., Ch.B., Sally W.Y. Luk, M.B., Ch.B., Sunny H. Wong, Ph.D., Louis H.S. Lau, M.B., Ch.B., Rashid N. Lui, M.B., Ch.B., Ting T. Chan, M.B., Ch.B., Joyce W.Y. Mak, M.B., Ch.B., Francis K.L. Chan, M.D., and Joseph J.Y. Sung, M.D.

Published April 1, 2020

Abstract

Background
It is recommended that patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding undergo endoscopy within 24 hours after gastroenterologic consultation. The role of endoscopy performed within time frames shorter than 24 hours has not been adequately defined.

Methods
To evaluate whether urgent endoscopy improves outcomes in patients predicted to be at high risk for further bleeding or death, we randomly assigned patients with overt signs of acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding and a Glasgow–Blatchford score of 12 or higher (scores range from 0 to 23, with higher scores indicating a higher risk of further bleeding or death) to undergo endoscopy within 6 hours (urgent-endoscopy group) or between 6 and 24 hours (early-endoscopy group) after gastroenterologic consultation. The primary end point was death from any cause within 30 days after randomization.

Results
A total of 516 patients were enrolled. The 30-day mortality was 8.9% (23 of 258 patients) in the urgent-endoscopy group and 6.6% (17 of 258) in the early-endoscopy group (difference, 2.3 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −2.3 to 6.9). Further bleeding within 30 days occurred in 28 patients (10.9%) in the urgent-endoscopy group and in 20 (7.8%) in the early-endoscopy group (difference, 3.1 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.9 to 8.1). Ulcers with active bleeding or visible vessels were found on initial endoscopy in 105 of the 158 patients (66.4%) with peptic ulcers in the urgent-endoscopy group and in 76 of 159 (47.8%) in the early-endoscopy group. Endoscopic hemostatic treatment was administered at initial endoscopy for 155 patients (60.1%) in the urgent-endoscopy group and for 125 (48.4%) in the early-endoscopy group.

Conclusions
In patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding who were at high risk for further bleeding or death, endoscopy performed within 6 hours after gastroenterologic consultation was not associated with lower 30-day mortality than endoscopy performed between 6 and 24 hours after consultation. (Funded by the Health and Medical Fund of the Food and Health Bureau, Government of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01675856.)
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding is one of the most common medical emergencies. A national audit from the United Kingdom estimated a crude overall in-hospital mortality of 10% after acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding.1 Endoscopy allows identification of the source of bleeding, as well as hemostatic treatment for actively bleeding lesions. Endoscopic hemostatic treatment of high-risk lesions stops bleeding and reduces the risk of further bleeding and the need for surgery.2 An international consensus group recommends endoscopy within 24 hours after presentation for patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding.3 For patients who are at high risk for further bleeding or death, the consensus group could not make a recommendation for or against performing endoscopy within 12 hours as opposed to performing endoscopy later. Many observational studies,4-16 three randomized, controlled trials,17-19 and two systematic reviews20,21 have shown that urgent endoscopy (the definitions of which have varied among studies, ranging from within 2 hours to within 12 hours after presentation) in unselected patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding did not decrease mortality. The three randomized trials were not designed to focus on patients at high risk for further bleeding or death and did not report an assessment of patients’ risk.
The Glasgow–Blatchford score is a validated risk-assessment score for the prediction of clinical outcomes, including the need for interventions and the risk of death (scores range from 0 to 23, with higher scores indicating a higher risk of further bleeding or death). In an international multicenter prospective study involving 3012 patients, a threshold score of 7 or higher was shown to provide the most accurate prediction of whether a patient will be determined to need endoscopic treatment.22 In our own validation study, a higher score was associated with a greater likelihood of undergoing endoscopic treatment, as well as with a higher risk of death.23 Recently, two large cohort studies16,24 provided conflicting results regarding the association between urgent endoscopy (within 6 hours after admission) and mortality. In a prospective cohort study involving 961 patients with Glasgow–Blatchford scores greater than 7, Cho et al.24 found that endoscopy performed within 6 hours, as compared with between 6 and 24 hours, was an independent predictor of lower mortality (odds ratio for death, 0.36; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.14 to 0.95). However, in the study by Laursen et al.,16 involving 2944 patients, the time frame for endoscopy that was associated with the lowest mortality was between 6 and 24 hours after admission. Mortality was higher among patients with hemodynamic instability or severe coexisting illnesses, defined as an American Society of Anesthesiologists grade of 3 to 5. A risk-assessment score was not used in that study.
In this trial, we hypothesized that for patients with acute gastrointestinal bleeding who were predicted to be at high risk for further bleeding or death, endoscopy performed within 6 hours after gastroenterologic consultation would forestall further bleeding and improve outcomes as compared with endoscopy performed between 6 and 24 hours after consultation.
