Early-Onset Alopecia and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A Cohort Study
Elinor Fondell *, Kathryn C Fitzgerald, Guido J Falcone, Éilis J O'Reilly, Alberto Ascherio

Abstract
A recent meta-analysis of 7 genome-wide association studies on early balding (alopecia) revealed single nucleotide polymorphism variants in the region of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) gene TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP/TDP-43). We therefore explored the association of early-onset alopecia and ALS in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, a large cohort of 51,529 US men. In 1992, the participants (then aged 46–81 years) were asked to report their hair line pattern at age 45 years. During the follow-up period (1992–2008), 42 men were diagnosed with ALS. Of those, 13 had reported no alopecia, 18 had reported moderate alopecia, and 11 had reported extensive alopecia at age 45 years. Those who reported extensive alopecia had an almost 3-fold increased risk of ALS compared with those who reported no alopecia (relative risk = 2.74, 95% confidence interval: 1.23, 6.13). Furthermore, we observed a linear trend of increased risk of ALS with increasing level of balding at age 45 years (Ptrend = 0.02). In conclusion, men with early-onset alopecia seem to have a higher risk of ALS. The mechanisms underlying this association deserve further investigation.

Keywords: alopecia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, cohort studies, male-pattern baldness, motor neuron disease

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease with a median survival of 1.5–3 years after diagnosis (1). The lifetime risk of ALS ranges from 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 400 according to different estimates (2, 3). The cause of ALS is largely unknown, and there is no effective treatment to date. Several observations suggest a link between early balding (alopecia) and ALS. ALS affects all motor neurons and cranial nerves except those that lack androgen receptors (4); a repeat expansion in the androgen receptor gene causes spinobulbar muscular atrophy (5), a nonfatal motor neuron disease similar to ALS, but does not cause ALS (6). Other mutations in the androgen receptor gene and increased sensitivity of the androgen receptor are linked to alopecia (7, 8). Furthermore, in a recent meta-analysis of 7 European genome-wide association studies, a single nucleotide polymorphism in the area of the ALS gene TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP/TDP-43) (9) was linked to alopecia. No previous studies have directly examined the association between alopecia and ALS. We therefore explored the association between early-onset alopecia and ALS among participants in a large cohort of US men.
