Ticagrelor versus Clopidogrel in Symptomatic Peripheral Artery Disease
Authors: William R. Hiatt, M.D., F. Gerry R. Fowkes, M.D., Gretchen Heizer, M.S., Jeffrey S. Berger, M.D., Iris Baumgartner, M.D., Peter Held, M.D., Ph.D., Brian G. Katona, Pharm.D., Kenneth W. Mahaffey, M.D., Lars Norgren, M.D., Ph.D., W. Schuyler Jones, M.D., Juuso Blomster, M.D., Marcus Millegård, M.Sc., Craig Reist, Ph.D., and Manesh R. Patel, M.D., for the EUCLID Trial Steering Committee and Investigators

Published January 5, 2017

Abstract

Background
Peripheral artery disease is considered to be a manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis with associated adverse cardiovascular and limb events. Data from previous trials have suggested that patients receiving clopidogrel monotherapy had a lower risk of cardiovascular events than those receiving aspirin. We wanted to compare clopidogrel with ticagrelor, a potent antiplatelet agent, in patients with peripheral artery disease.

Methods
In this double-blind, event-driven trial, we randomly assigned 13,885 patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease to receive monotherapy with ticagrelor (90 mg twice daily) or clopidogrel (75 mg once daily). Patients were eligible if they had an ankle–brachial index (ABI) of 0.80 or less or had undergone previous revascularization of the lower limbs. The primary efficacy end point was a composite of adjudicated cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or ischemic stroke. The primary safety end point was major bleeding. The median follow-up was 30 months.

Results
The median age of the patients was 66 years, and 72% were men; 43% were enrolled on the basis of the ABI and 57% on the basis of previous revascularization. The mean baseline ABI in all patients was 0.71, 76.6% of the patients had claudication, and 4.6% had critical limb ischemia. The primary efficacy end point occurred in 751 of 6930 patients (10.8%) receiving ticagrelor and in 740 of 6955 (10.6%) receiving clopidogrel (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.92 to 1.13; P=0.65). In each group, acute limb ischemia occurred in 1.7% of the patients (hazard ratio, 1.03; 95% CI, 0.79 to 1.33; P=0.85) and major bleeding in 1.6% (hazard ratio, 1.10; 95% CI, 0.84 to 1.43; P=0.49).

Conclusions
In patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease, ticagrelor was not shown to be superior to clopidogrel for the reduction of cardiovascular events. Major bleeding occurred at similar rates among the patients in the two trial groups. (Funded by AstraZeneca; EUCLID ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01732822.)
Peripheral artery disease is considered to be a clinical manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis affecting the vascular territories supplying the lower limbs. Most patients presenting with peripheral artery disease do not have a clinical history of cardiac or cerebral ischemic events, yet these patients are at high risk for myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, and cardiovascular death.1 Concomitant clinical evidence of coronary or cerebrovascular disease only magnifies this risk.2
Therapies to reduce the ischemic risk associated with atherosclerosis have focused on patients with acute coronary syndromes and stable coronary artery disease. Antithrombotic drugs, mainly antiplatelet therapies and statins, are the cornerstone of care. There have been no large trials focusing on patients with peripheral artery disease, which has led to limited direct evidence to support any guideline recommendations for specific antiplatelet therapies in such patients.3,4 Clopidogrel monotherapy has been shown to be more effective than aspirin monotherapy in reducing cardiovascular events in a subgroup of patients with peripheral artery disease in a comparison with patients with other forms of stable cardiovascular disease.3
Ticagrelor, an inhibitor of platelet P2Y12 receptor, has shown evidence of benefit among patients with acute coronary syndromes and stable coronary artery disease, as defined by a history of myocardial infarction.5,6 Concomitant peripheral artery disease in patients with an acute coronary syndrome event increases the risk of subsequent cardiovascular events. In a recent trial involving patients with acute coronary syndromes, ticagrelor resulted in a relative risk reduction similar to the reduction in the overall trial, but the drug was associated with a larger absolute risk reduction in a comparison with patients who had an acute coronary syndrome without peripheral artery disease.7 In another clinical trial, patients with a history of myocardial infarction and concomitant peripheral artery disease also had a greater risk of cardiovascular events and a greater absolute risk reduction with ticagrelor than did patients with previous myocardial infarction alone.8 On the basis of previous observations and the need to develop evidence for specific therapies, we performed the Examining Use of Ticagrelor in Peripheral Artery Disease (EUCLID) trial to test the hypothesis that monotherapy with ticagrelor would be superior to therapy with clopidogrel in preventing cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or ischemic stroke in patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease.
